



PKI, Logs, And Tree Signatures                              R. Stradling
Internet-Draft                                                   Sectigo
Intended status: Experimental                             17 August 2026
Expires: 18 February 2027


           Merkle Tree Certificate Revocation Status (MTCRS)
                    draft-strad-plants-mtcrs-latest

Abstract

   This document defines a hash chain revocation mechanism for Merkle
   Tree Certificates (MTC) [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs].  A
   Merkle Tree CA includes a hash chain anchor (the "target") in the
   certificate at issuance time.  Periodically, the CA reveals hash
   chain values that serve as proof of non-revocation.  The
   authenticating party embeds the current hash chain value (a "tick")
   in the certificate's MTCProof, enabling the relying party to
   cryptographically verify that the certificate has not been revoked,
   with granularity as fine as one hour, or finer.

   This mechanism provides timely revocation without requiring
   signatures per revocation check, without relying on the relying party
   to poll for revocation updates, and without introducing new trust
   relationships beyond the existing CA.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://robstradling.github.io/mtcrs/draft-strad-plants-mtcrs.html.
   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-strad-plants-mtcrs/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the PKI, Logs, And Tree
   Signatures Working Group mailing list (mailto:plants@ietf.org), which
   is archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/plants.
   Subscribe at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/plants/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/robstradling/mtcrs.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 18 February 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Rationale for This Approach
     1.2.  Why Functional Revocation Is Superior to Passive Expiry
       1.2.1.  The Role of CA Validation Frequency
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Hash Chain Construction
     3.1.  Parameters
     3.2.  Chain Generation
     3.3.  Period Numbering
     3.4.  Revealing Values
     3.5.  Security of the Hash Chain
     3.6.  Rationale for Using the Target as the Period 0 Tick
   4.  Integration with MTC Log Entries
     4.1.  Hash Chain Anchor Extension
     4.2.  Alternative: Carrying the Anchor as a Merkle Tree Entry
           Extension
   5.  Certificate Presentation
     5.1.  Hash Chain Tick
       5.1.1.  Preferred Encoding: Trailing status_tick Field
       5.1.2.  Alternative Encoding: Proof Extension
     5.2.  Use in TLS
     5.3.  Standalone and Landmark-Relative Certificates
   6.  Verification
   7.  Tick Distribution
     7.1.  HTTP Interface
     7.2.  Discovering the Tick Base URL
     7.3.  ACME Integration
     7.4.  Unguessable Tick URLs
     7.5.  Response Format
     7.6.  Operational Model
     7.7.  Distributing Tick Requests
       7.7.1.  Client-Side: Deterministic Per-Entry Offset
       7.7.2.  Server-Side: Cache Freshness and Retry-After
   8.  Privacy Considerations
   9.  Security Considerations
     9.1.  Hash Function Requirements
     9.2.  Seed Confidentiality
     9.3.  Denial of Service via Tick Withholding
     9.4.  Relying Parties Do Not Fetch Ticks
     9.5.  Unauthenticated Proof Extensions
     9.6.  Interaction with Base MTC Revocation
     9.7.  Clock Skew
   10. IANA Considerations
     10.1.  Module Identifier
     10.2.  Certificate Extension
     10.3.  Access Descriptor
     10.4.  Well-Known URI
     10.5.  ACME Order Object Fields
     10.6.  MTCProof Extension Type
   11. References
     11.1.  Normative References
     11.2.  Informative References
   Appendix A.  ASN.1 Module
   Appendix B.  Hash Chain Input Encoding
   Appendix C.  Test Vectors
   Appendix D.  Design Rationale
     D.1.  Why Hash Chains (Micali) Instead of Other Revocation
           Mechanisms
     D.2.  Why One Hour (or One Day) Periods
     D.3.  CA-Side Storage and Computation Trade-off
     D.4.  Why Embed the Tick in the MTCProof
     D.5.  Comparison with OCSP Stapling
       D.5.1.  Why OCSP Stapling Is Not Enforceable
       D.5.2.  Why This Mechanism Is Enforceable
       D.5.3.  Why It Is More Readily Deployable
   Appendix E.  Alternatives Considered
     E.1.  DNS-Based Tick Distribution
     E.2.  AIA-Based Tick URL Discovery
     E.3.  TLS Extension (Separate from Certificate)
     E.4.  TLS status_request Extension
     E.5.  Shorter Certificate Lifetimes
     E.6.  CRLite / CRLSets / External Revocation
     E.7.  Per-Certificate Signatures (OCSP-like)
   Appendix F.  Anticipated Objections
     F.1.  "MTC Was Designed to Avoid Revocation Complexity"
     F.2.  "This Creates a New Availability Dependency"
     F.3.  "Just Use Shorter Certificate Lifetimes"
     F.4.  "CRLite/CRLSets Already Solve This Problem"
     F.5.  "The Non-Critical Extension Means Split Enforcement"
     F.6.  "CA Seed Compromise Is Catastrophic"
     F.7.  "Modifying MTCProof Breaks Existing Implementations"
     F.8.  "Hourly Tick Refresh Adds Operational Burden to Servers"
     F.9.  "This Introduces a Covert Denial-of-Service Vector"
     F.10. "Verification Cost Grows Linearly with Certificate Age"
   Appendix G.  Proposed MTCProof Extensibility
     G.1.  Motivation
     G.2.  Proposed Amendment
     G.3.  Hash Chain Tick as a Proof Extension
     G.4.  Backward Compatibility
     G.5.  Considerations for the proof_extensions Field
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Merkle Tree Certificates [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]
   authenticate TLS connections using compact inclusion proofs into a
   Merkle Tree maintained by a certification authority (CA).  The base
   MTC specification uses a short-lived certificates model, where
   certificate expiration replaces explicit revocation signals.

   However, deployments such as Chrome's draft MTC policy [CHROME-MTC]
   permit certificate lifetimes of up to 47 days.  At this timescale,
   key compromise or certificate misissuance can cause significant harm
   before natural expiry.  The base MTC specification acknowledges this
   gap and suggests that relying parties with access to external
   revocation systems like [CRLite] or [CRLSets] SHOULD use them, but
   does not define an in-band revocation mechanism.

   This document defines such a mechanism based on hash chains [MICALI].
   At issuance, the CA commits a hash chain anchor into the MTC log
   entry as an X.509 extension.  Each revocation period (e.g., every
   hour), the CA reveals the next hash chain value for all non-revoked
   certificates.  To revoke a certificate, the CA simply stops revealing
   values.  The authenticating party (server) embeds the current hash
   chain value in the certificate's MTCProof (the signatureValue), and
   the relying party (client) verifies it against the anchor committed
   in the log entry.

   This approach achieves the following properties:

   *  *Timely revocation:* Revocation takes effect within one period
      (e.g., one hour), regardless of when the relying party last
      updated its trusted subtrees.

   *  *No per-check signatures:* Unlike OCSP [RFC6960], verification
      requires only hash computations, not signature verification.  The
      CA incurs no signing load for revocation status.

   *  *Mandatory enforcement:* The hash chain value is a required
      component of the certificate presentation.  Unlike OCSP stapling,
      the mechanism cannot be silently omitted by the authenticating
      party.

   *  *Self-authenticating:* The hash chain value is verified against
      the anchor already committed in the Merkle Tree.  No new trust
      relationships or authenticated channels are needed.

   *  *Minimal overhead:* A single tick (36 bytes for SHA-256: a 4-byte
      period and a 32-byte hash value) is added to the certificate's
      MTCProof.

1.1.  Rationale for This Approach

   Several alternative revocation mechanisms were considered and
   rejected.  Appendix E provides detailed analysis of each.  The hash
   chain approach was selected because it uniquely combines mandatory
   enforcement (the value is structurally required for certificate
   validity), zero signing overhead, self-authentication against an
   already-trusted anchor, and minimal bandwidth cost.

1.2.  Why Functional Revocation Is Superior to Passive Expiry

   A common argument holds that sufficiently short certificate lifetimes
   eliminate the need for revocation: if a certificate expires in one
   day, the window of exposure after key compromise or misissuance is
   bounded by that day.  This reasoning is incomplete.  Three
   independent time intervals govern the security of a certificate:

   1.  *Certificate lifetime:* The maximum duration for which a
       certificate can be presented.  Without revocation, this is the
       upper bound on exposure after any problem.

   2.  *Revocation latency:* Once the CA decides to revoke, how quickly
       can the certificate become unusable?  Without a revocation
       mechanism, this equals the remaining certificate lifetime.  With
       hash chain revocation, this is at most two revocation periods
       (e.g., two hours).

   3.  *CA validation frequency:* How often the CA re-verifies that the
       subscriber remains authorized (domain control, organization
       identity, etc.).  This determines how quickly the CA _learns_ of
       problems that are not self-reported by the subscriber.

   These three intervals interact as follows.  The worst-case exposure
   time after a problem occurs is:

 exposure = min(remaining_lifetime, detection_time + revocation_latency)

   Without revocation, detection_time is irrelevant — the certificate
   remains valid until it expires regardless of what the CA knows.  With
   revocation, the CA can act as soon as it detects the problem, and the
   certificate becomes unusable within the revocation latency.

   This has a counterintuitive consequence: a certificate with a long
   lifetime but active revocation can provide _shorter_ exposure than a
   certificate with a short lifetime but no revocation.  For example:

   *  A 1-day certificate without revocation: worst-case exposure is ~24
      hours (compromise occurs immediately after issuance).

   *  A 47-day certificate with 1-hour hash chain revocation: if the CA
      learns of the compromise within minutes (subscriber report, domain
      validation re-check, or external notification), worst-case
      exposure is ~2 hours.

   By substituting expensive asymmetric signatures with incredibly cheap
   symmetric hashing, this mechanism allows CAs to achieve the security
   benefit of an hourly expiration window without any of the
   architectural cost that comes with hourly re-issuance [SHORTLIVED].
   Rather than re-signing and re-logging every certificate each hour,
   the CA reveals a single precomputed hash value per period, and the
   relying party verifies it with a single hash computation.

   The critical difference is that passive expiry provides no mechanism
   for the CA to act on new information.  A hash chain tick is a
   _continuous assertion of non-revocation_ — each tick is an active
   statement by the CA that, as of this period, it has not revoked the
   certificate.  Absence of the tick is immediately detectable and
   enforced by the relying party.

1.2.1.  The Role of CA Validation Frequency

   Even with functional revocation, the CA cannot revoke a certificate
   for a problem it does not know about.  The frequency of CA re-
   validation therefore determines the effective security bound for non-
   self-reported problems (e.g., loss of domain control that the
   subscriber does not notice or report).

   Without revocation, validation frequency is largely irrelevant: even
   if the CA discovers a problem mid-lifetime, it cannot shorten the
   certificate's validity.  The only recourse is to publish the
   revocation via an external mechanism (CRLite, CRLSets) that may or
   may not reach all relying parties.

   With hash chain revocation, frequent CA validation translates
   directly into security improvement: the CA can revoke within one
   period of detecting any problem.  This creates an incentive structure
   where CAs that validate more frequently provide measurably better
   security — an incentive that does not exist in a pure short-lived-
   certificate model without revocation.

   Root program policies can leverage this by requiring both short
   revocation periods and minimum re-validation frequencies, achieving a
   defence-in-depth posture that neither mechanism provides alone.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Hash Chain Construction

3.1.  Parameters

   The hash chain mechanism introduces the following additional
   parameter:

   revocation_period:  A duration, in seconds, that determines the
      granularity of revocation.  This MUST be greater than zero.  The
      RECOMMENDED and default value is 3600 (one hour); Section 4
      specifies how this default is encoded so that a certificate using
      it carries no revocation_period bytes.  The number of periods in a
      certificate's lifetime is chain_length = ceil(lifetime /
      revocation_period). revocation_period need not evenly divide the
      lifetime; if it does not, the final period is shorter than
      revocation_period, ending when the certificate expires.  This is
      harmless: the verifier computes the period from not_before
      (Section 3) and the base MTC validity check bounds the certificate
      at notAfter, so the truncated final period needs no special
      handling, and its shorter span only means revocation during it
      takes effect faster.

   The certificate's validity period MUST be longer than
   revocation_period.  A certificate whose validity period is not longer
   than revocation_period would have chain_length = 1: its only tick is
   the public period-0 anchor, which enforces nothing (revocation is
   only enforceable from period 1 onwards; see Section 3.6).  A CA MUST
   NOT include the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension, and MUST NOT use
   this mechanism, for such a certificate.  Because the period-0 grace
   defers enforcement of a just-issued certificate to the start of
   period 2 (Section 3.6), deployments SHOULD choose a validity period
   substantially longer than twice revocation_period so that revocation
   is effective for most of the certificate's life.

   revocation_period is a per-certificate value: it is carried in the
   certificate itself, in the HashChainAnchorInfo committed to the
   Merkle Tree (Section 4), rather than being a CA-wide configuration
   constant.  This is deliberate.  Because a relying party verifies
   offline and has no provisioning relationship with the CA, the only
   way it can obtain revocation_period without a new authenticated
   distribution channel is to read it from the certificate; carrying it
   in the tree-committed extension makes it both discoverable by the
   relying party and self-authenticating.  It also lets a CA change
   revocation_period for newly issued certificates without
   redistributing anything or invalidating existing certificates, each
   of which keeps the value it was issued with.  A CA MAY of course use
   the same revocation_period for every certificate it issues; the point
   is only that the value each verifier uses comes from the certificate,
   not from CA-wide configuration that verifiers cannot see.

3.2.  Chain Generation

   At certificate issuance time, for each log entry, the CA generates a
   hash chain as follows:

   1.  Generate a cryptographically random seed of HASH_SIZE bytes (32
       bytes for SHA-256).

   2.  Compute the hash chain of length chain_length + 1:

      h[0] = seed
      h[i] = Hash(HashChainInput(h[i-1]))  for i = 1, ..., chain_length

       Where HashChainInput is defined in Appendix B.

   3.  The anchor (target) is h[chain_length], the final value in the
       chain.

   The anchor is included in the certificate as an X.509 extension (see
   Section 4).

3.3.  Period Numbering

   Periods are numbered starting from 0.  Period 0 begins at the
   certificate's notBefore time and each subsequent period begins
   revocation_period seconds later.  The period number at any given time
   t is:

   period = floor((t - not_before) / revocation_period)

   not_before is the notBefore time of the certificate's validity
   period, expressed in the same units as t (seconds since the Unix
   epoch).  It anchors the period schedule to a value that both the CA
   and every verifier read from the certificate, so they compute
   identical period boundaries regardless of their wall-clock
   differences; it is not necessarily the exact instant of issuance.
   The CA MUST number periods from notBefore and MUST NOT begin
   revealing ticks before period 0 starts at notBefore.

   A CA commonly sets notBefore slightly earlier than the actual instant
   of issuance (backdating) to tolerate relying-party clock skew.  This
   is harmless here: it merely places the certificate a little way into
   period 0 when it is first presented (or, if notBefore is backdated by
   more than one revocation_period, into a later period).  Setting
   notBefore later than issuance (forward-dating) is different: there is
   no period earlier than 0, and for any time t earlier than notBefore
   the quantity (t - not_before) is negative.  Such a certificate is
   simply not yet valid; a verifier MUST reject it through the base MTC
   validity check before computing any period, and MUST NOT evaluate the
   period expression with unsigned arithmetic, which would underflow for
   such times and could yield a spuriously large period.

3.4.  Revealing Values

   For each non-revoked certificate, at the start of period t, the CA
   reveals the hash chain value h[chain_length - t].  This value can be
   verified by hashing it t times and comparing with the anchor.

   For period 0, chain_length - t equals chain_length, so the value
   revealed is the anchor h[chain_length] itself, which is already
   public (it is committed in the certificate; see Section 4).  The
   period 0 tick therefore provides no cryptographic assurance of non-
   revocation, and any party can construct it.  This is an intentional
   design choice; see Section 3.6 for the rationale.

   To revoke a certificate, the CA stops revealing new values.  Once the
   previous value expires (at the start of the next period), the
   certificate is effectively revoked: no party can produce a valid
   value without knowledge of unrevealed chain elements, which requires
   inverting the hash function.  Because period 0's value is the public
   anchor, the earliest period for which the CA can withhold a secret
   value is period 1; a certificate therefore cannot be revoked during
   period 0.

3.5.  Security of the Hash Chain

   The security of this mechanism relies on the preimage resistance of
   the hash function.  Given h[i], it is computationally infeasible to
   compute h[i-1] (which would be needed to forge a future validity
   proof).  The chain is revealed in reverse order precisely for this
   reason: knowledge of the current value does not help compute future
   values.

   The label in HashChainInput (Appendix B) domain-separates chain
   values from other uses of the hash function in MTC, and the per-entry
   issuer_id, log_number, and index salt each certificate's chain into
   its own hash domain (Appendix B).

3.6.  Rationale for Using the Target as the Period 0 Tick

   Revealing the anchor h[chain_length] as the period 0 tick means the
   mechanism does not enforce revocation during period 0.  The earliest
   period for which the CA can withhold a secret value is period 1, and,
   because a relying party accepts the tick for the current or the
   immediately preceding period (the acceptance window of Section 6 also
   allows the immediately following period, but that does not extend
   acceptance of the period 0 anchor), the public anchor remains
   acceptable throughout period 1.  A certificate that the CA wishes to
   revoke from the moment of issuance thus becomes unusable at the start
   of period 2.  This is the same worst-case bound of at most two
   revocation periods that applies to any revocation decision
   (Section 1.2); the only capability given up is the ability to revoke
   a certificate faster than that bound in the first moments after
   issuance.  This trade-off is deliberate and has two advantages.

   Operational grace period at issuance:  The CA's tick distribution
      service (Section 7) does not need to have computed and begun
      serving a certificate's first secret tick at the exact instant of
      issuance.  It has until the start of period 1 -- one full
      revocation_period -- to make the certificate's chain available.
      This mirrors established practice for OCSP [RFC6960], where a
      newly issued certificate's first status response is permitted to
      be briefly unavailable after issuance (the CA/Browser Forum
      Baseline Requirements, for example, allow up to 15 minutes).
      Revocation infrastructure need not be instantaneously ready for
      brand-new certificates.

   Narrow, low-value window:  The only capability lost is revoking a
      certificate within the first revocation_period after it was
      issued.  A certificate that must be revoked within, for example,
      one hour of issuance is an unusual case, and the CA directly
      controls the relevant decision: if it already knows at issuance
      time that a certificate should not be trusted, it simply does not
      issue it.  That an arbitrary party can present the public anchor
      as a period 0 tick confers no additional capability on an
      attacker, because presenting the certificate in a TLS handshake
      still requires possession of the corresponding private key.  It
      means only that the CA's revocation signal does not take effect
      until period 1.

   A deployment that instead requires revocation enforcement from the
   moment of issuance, with no period 0 grace, can obtain it by treating
   the anchor as an ordinary secret chain element: compute the chain one
   element longer, use h[chain_length + 1] as the anchor, and hash the
   revealed value period + 1 times (rather than period times) during
   verification.  The period 0 tick is then the secret value
   h[chain_length], which the CA can withhold.  This document uses the
   shorter construction because the operational grace period is
   generally more valuable than sub-two-period revocation of a just-
   issued certificate.

4.  Integration with MTC Log Entries

4.1.  Hash Chain Anchor Extension

   This document defines a new X.509 certificate extension for carrying
   the hash chain anchor.  This extension is included in the
   TBSCertificateLogEntry's extensions field, and thus appears in the
   TBSCertificate of the resulting Merkle Tree Certificate.

   id-pe-hashChainAnchor OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= {
       iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) pe(1) TBD }

   The extension value contains the DER encoding of the following ASN.1
   structure:

   HashChainAnchorInfo ::= SEQUENCE {
       revocationPeriod  INTEGER (1..MAX) DEFAULT 3600,
       anchor            OCTET STRING
   }

   revocationPeriod:  The revocation period in seconds for this
      certificate (Section 3), with a default of 3600 (one hour).  Under
      DER, a certificate using the default value MUST omit this field
      (X.690, Section 11.5), so the common one-hour case adds no per-
      entry bytes; a relying party that finds the field absent MUST use
      the default of 3600.  The relying party reads this value (or the
      default) from here; it is used to number periods and to compute
      the expected period during verification (Section 6).

   anchor:  The hash chain anchor value h[chain_length] (HASH_SIZE
      bytes).

   The id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension SHOULD be marked non-critical, so
   that relying parties that do not implement this mechanism can still
   process the certificate.  However, relying parties that do implement
   this mechanism MUST enforce hash chain verification as described in
   Section 6 when the extension is present.  An MTC ecosystem in which
   all relying parties are expected to support hash chain revocation MAY
   mark the extension critical, causing implementations that do not
   recognize it to reject the certificate.

   The extension MUST appear at most once in a certificate.  The
   extension MUST NOT be present in a certificate whose validity period
   is not longer than revocation_period (Section 3); such a certificate
   cannot advance beyond period 0, so the mechanism would enforce
   nothing.

   Because the anchor is committed to the Merkle Tree, this extension
   enlarges every log entry that carries it.  With the default
   revocation_period, the committed data is a HashChainAnchorInfo
   carrying only the anchor (HASH_SIZE bytes, 32 for SHA-256) plus its
   DER and extension framing -- on the order of 40 to 50 bytes per
   entry.  This is the unavoidable price of self-authentication: unlike
   the tick base URL, which is deliberately kept out of the certificate
   (Section 7.2), the anchor is the value every tick is verified against
   and therefore cannot be delivered out of band.  The DEFAULT encoding
   of revocationPeriod keeps that field off the wire whenever the
   default period is used, holding the committed cost to the anchor
   itself.

4.2.  Alternative: Carrying the Anchor as a Merkle Tree Entry Extension

   This document carries the anchor in an X.509 certificate extension
   (id-pe-hashChainAnchor) placed in the extensions field of the
   TBSCertificateLogEntry, and thus also in the TBSCertificate.  An
   alternative is to carry it as a MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension -- the
   entry-level extension point defined in Section 5.2.1 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] -- rather than as an X.509
   extension.  Both are committed to the Merkle Tree, so either home
   makes the anchor self-authenticating; the choice is between two
   extension mechanisms, not between committed and uncommitted storage.

   In this alternative, a new MerkleTreeCertEntryExtensionType (for
   example, hash_chain_anchor) is registered with the base
   specification, and its extension_data carries the HashChainAnchorInfo
   (DER-encoded, or an equivalent TLS-encoded structure).  The verifier
   reads the anchor and revocation_period from the entry's extensions,
   which it already reconstructs from the MTCProof's extensions field
   during base MTC verification (Section 7.2 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]), rather than from an X.509
   extension.

   This has a natural symmetry with the tick's encoding: the immutable,
   committed anchor lives in the committed entry extensions, while the
   mutable, per-period tick lives in the uncommitted trailing field or
   proof_extensions (Section 5).  It is also more compact, because a
   MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension uses a short TLS type-and-length framing
   rather than an X.509 extension's OBJECT IDENTIFIER and DER wrapper.

   It has three costs, however:

   *  *No criticality lever.* Entry extensions have no critical marking,
      and relying parties ignore unrecognized ones (Section 12.5 of
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]).  The transition strategy of
      marking the X.509 extension critical to force unaware relying
      parties to hard-fail (Appendix F) is therefore unavailable;
      enforcement rests entirely on relying parties that implement this
      mechanism.

   *  *Not visible to generic X.509 tooling.* The anchor no longer
      appears in the TBSCertificate, so only MTC-aware software can
      observe that a certificate uses this mechanism.

   *  *The log-signing infrastructure must be MTCRS-aware.* Section 5.4
      of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] forbids a CA cosigner from
      signing a subtree containing an entry with an extension_type it
      does not recognize.  A hash_chain_anchor entry extension therefore
      forces the CA's log and cosigner components to recognize it before
      they can sign any subtree containing an MTCRS certificate.  With
      the X.509 extension, the anchor rides inside the entry's
      tbs_cert_entry_data as ordinary certificate bytes, so that
      recognition gate (which concerns the entry type and
      extension_type, not X.509 extensions) never fires: the generic log
      and cosigner infrastructure remain MTCRS-agnostic, and only the
      issuance front-end and the tick distribution service (Section 7)
      need be MTCRS-aware.

   Because of the last point in particular, this document uses the X.509
   extension as the primary design: it lets this mechanism be layered
   onto an otherwise unmodified MTC log and cosigner deployment.  A base
   specification that is willing to make its entry-extension registry
   and cosigner software aware of hash chain revocation MAY instead
   adopt the entry-extension encoding, gaining the compactness and the
   committed/uncommitted symmetry described above.

5.  Certificate Presentation

5.1.  Hash Chain Tick

   When a hash chain anchor extension is present in the certificate, the
   authenticating party MUST include a hash chain tick in the MTCProof
   structure (carried in the certificate's signatureValue).  The tick is
   a HashChainTick:

   struct {
       uint32 period;
       HashValue value;
   } HashChainTick;

   period:  The period number for which this tick is valid.  It tells
      the relying party both the freshness the tick asserts -- that the
      certificate was not revoked as of this period, checked against the
      relying party's clock (Section 6) -- and how many times to hash
      value forward to reach the committed anchor, which cannot be taken
      from the relying party's own expected period because clock skew
      and caching allow the presented tick to be for an adjacent period.
      The field is 32 bits so that fine revocation_period values remain
      usable across the full certificate lifetime: a 16-bit field would
      overflow at 65,535 periods, which a minute-granularity period
      already exceeds within a 47-day lifetime.

   value:  The hash chain value h[chain_length - period].

   The MTCProof is not committed to the Merkle Tree (only the
   TBSCertificateLogEntry is hashed into the tree), so the tick can be
   updated each period without affecting the inclusion proof or
   cosignatures.  The authenticating party reconstructs or replaces the
   signatureValue with a fresh tick while reusing the same inclusion
   proof and signatures.

   The authenticating party MUST include a HashChainTick with a period
   value that is current at the time of the TLS handshake.  A relying
   party SHOULD accept ticks for the current period, the immediately
   preceding period, or the immediately following period, to allow for
   clock skew and caching (Section 9.7).

   This document describes two possible ways to carry the HashChainTick
   inside the MTCProof, but only one is used in practice: the encoding
   is fixed by the base MTC specification, not chosen per deployment.
   Both are amendments to the base MTCProof structure and differ in
   generality.  The trailing-field encoding (Section 5.1.1) is
   RECOMMENDED: it appends the fixed-size tick directly to the MTCProof,
   which is the minimal change and confines the added, unauthenticated
   bytes to exactly one value that a conforming relying party fully
   verifies.  The proof-extension encoding (Section 5.1.2) is an
   alternative for a base specification that additionally wants a
   general, reusable proof-level extensibility point (Appendix G); as a
   general "ignore if unknown" channel it carries the abuse surface
   discussed in Appendix G.5, which for a single 36-byte use is not
   otherwise justified.  Whichever encoding the base specification
   selects becomes the single encoding used throughout the ecosystem;
   the other is discarded (see Appendix F).

5.1.1.  Preferred Encoding: Trailing status_tick Field

   In the RECOMMENDED encoding, the base MTC specification is amended to
   append the HashChainTick to the MTCProof as a trailing status_tick
   field.  The field is not a bare optional field -- the base MTCProof
   has no discriminant for one -- but a variant selected by whether the
   certificate carries the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension, occupying
   zero bytes when it does not:

   struct {
       MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
       uint48 start;
       uint48 end;
       HashValue inclusion_proof<0..2^16-1>;
       MTCSignature signatures<0..2^16-1>;
       select (certificate_has_hashChainAnchor) {
           case false: Empty;
           case true:  HashChainTick;
       } status_tick;
   } MTCProof;

   certificate_has_hashChainAnchor is the contextual boolean "the
   certificate's TBSCertificate contains the id-pe-hashChainAnchor
   extension".  Like the base specification's select on the certificate
   context (for example, Section 5.2.1 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]) and the analogous contextual
   selects in TLS ([RFC8446]), the discriminant is not a field of the
   structure; it is always available where an MTCProof is parsed,
   because an MTCProof is only ever decoded as the signatureValue of a
   specific certificate whose extensions are known.  The false case uses
   the Empty type (an empty structure), so a certificate that does not
   use this mechanism carries no additional bytes and is byte-identical
   to a base MTCProof.

   This resolves precisely the "extra data after the MTCProof" check in
   Section 7.2 of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs], which that
   section is amended to interpret as follows:

   *  If the certificate contains the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension
      (the true case), exactly one HashChainTick (4 + HASH_SIZE bytes;
      36 bytes for SHA-256) MUST immediately follow the signatures
      vector, and the signatureValue MUST end there.  A relying party
      MUST reject the certificate if any bytes remain after this
      HashChainTick, or if the signatureValue ends before a complete
      HashChainTick has been read.

   *  If the certificate does not contain the id-pe-hashChainAnchor
      extension (the false case), status_tick is Empty and the original
      rule is unchanged: the signatureValue MUST end immediately after
      the signatures vector, with no trailing bytes.

   A relying party predating the amendment would reject the certificate
   at the MTCProof parsing stage; such a relying party could not verify
   hash chain revocation in any case.

   This is the minimal change to the base MTCProof structure.  Because
   the appended field is fixed-size and, for a conforming relying party,
   fully verified against the committed anchor (Section 6), it adds no
   variable-length "ignore if unknown" region and hence no general
   stuffing or covert-channel surface (contrast Section 5.1.2 and
   Appendix G.5).  Its only cost is that carrying a second proof-level
   mechanism in future would require a further base-specification
   change.

5.1.2.  Alternative Encoding: Proof Extension

   Alternatively, if the base MTC specification wants a general,
   reusable proof-level extensibility point rather than a single
   appended field, it can adopt the proof_extensions structure defined
   in Appendix G and carry the HashChainTick as one of its entries.

   The HashChainTick is then encoded as an MTCProofExtension with
   extension_type set to hash_chain_tick(0) and extension_data
   containing the serialized HashChainTick (4 + HASH_SIZE bytes), as
   described in Appendix G.  When the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension is
   present, the MTCProof MUST contain exactly one hash_chain_tick proof
   extension.

   This encoding can also carry future proof-level mechanisms (for
   example, other self-authenticating freshness values) without a
   further structural change, and lets a conforming parser skip a tick
   it does not recognize.  Those benefits come at a cost: as a general,
   unauthenticated, "ignore if unknown" channel it introduces the abuse
   surface -- bloat, covert channels, and a strippable soft-fail for any
   misuse -- discussed in Appendix G.5.  This document treats that
   surface as unjustified for a single 36-byte use, and therefore
   recommends the trailing field (Section 5.1.1) unless a concrete need
   for general extensibility exists.

5.2.  Use in TLS

   No new TLS extension type is required.  When the authenticating party
   presents a Merkle Tree Certificate, the hash chain tick is carried
   within the certificate's signatureValue as part of the MTCProof,
   which is already transmitted in the CertificateEntry.

   The presence of id-pe-hashChainAnchor in the TBSCertificate signals
   to the relying party that the MTCProof carries a HashChainTick
   (Section 5).  If the tick is absent, malformed, or fails
   verification, the relying party MUST reject the certificate.

5.3.  Standalone and Landmark-Relative Certificates

   A Merkle Tree CA can issue two certificate profiles for the same log
   entry: a standalone certificate and a landmark-relative certificate
   (Sections 6.3 and 6.4 of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]).  The
   two differ only in the subtree and signatures carried in their
   MTCProof; they certify the same TBSCertificateLogEntry.

   Hash chain revocation is keyed by the log entry, not by the
   certificate profile:

   *  Both profiles commit to the same id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension
      (part of the TBSCertificateLogEntry, or of the entry's extensions;
      see Section 4.2), so a single anchor and hash chain per entry
      serves both.

   *  entry_hash (Section 7) is computed over the entry's
      tbs_cert_entry_data, which is identical for both profiles, so both
      resolve to the same tick URL and the same tick.

   *  The HashChainTick for a given period is therefore identical in
      both certificates.

   An authenticating party that holds both a standalone and a landmark-
   relative certificate for the same entry -- for example, during the
   renewal overlap described in Section 10.4 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] -- fetches the entry's tick once
   per period and writes that same value into the MTCProof of whichever
   certificate it presents.  Refreshing the tick is independent of
   profile selection: the authenticating party selects between the two
   certificates using the base MTC mechanism (Section 8 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]), and updates the HashChainTick
   in whichever MTCProof it sends.

6.  Verification

   When a relying party receives a Merkle Tree Certificate with the id-
   pe-hashChainAnchor extension, it performs hash chain verification in
   addition to the base MTC verification procedure.

   The verifier first assembles the inputs to HashChainInput
   (Appendix B) and to the period computation (Section 3).  All of them
   are obtained from the certificate and the trust anchor being
   validated against; no data from the CA's tick distribution service
   (Section 7) is needed, and the verifier MUST NOT fetch anything
   (Section 9.4):

   *  *issuer_id:* the TrustAnchorID of the trust anchor against which
      the certificate is being validated (Section 5.1 of
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]).

   *  *log_number and index:* recovered from the certificate's serial
      number, which the base specification defines as serial =
      (log_number << 48) | index (Section 6.2 of
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]); the verifier takes index as
      the low 48 bits and log_number as the remaining high bits.

   *  *revocation_period and anchor:* read from the HashChainAnchorInfo
      carried in the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension; if
      revocationPeriod is absent, use its default of 3600 (Section 4).

   *  *not_before:* the notBefore time of the certificate's validity
      period (Section 3), which is the same value the CA used to number
      periods.

   Using these inputs, the verifier performs the following steps:

1.  Extract the HashChainAnchorInfo from the certificate's id-pe-
    hashChainAnchor extension.  If not present, skip hash chain
    verification (the certificate does not use this mechanism).

2.  Extract the HashChainTick from the MTCProof (in the certificate's
    signatureValue), according to the encoding fixed by the base MTC
    specification: the trailing status_tick field (Section 5.1.1) or,
    if the general proof_extensions amendment was adopted instead,
    the hash_chain_tick proof extension (Section 5.1.2).  If the id-
    pe-hashChainAnchor extension is present but the MTCProof does not
    carry a HashChainTick, reject the certificate with a
    bad_certificate error.

3.  Compute the expected period from the current time:

expected_period = floor((current_time - not_before) / revocation_period)

4.  Check that tick.period is equal to expected_period,
    expected_period - 1, or expected_period + 1 (Section 9.7).  If
    not, reject the certificate with a certificate_expired error.

5.  Starting from tick.value, iteratively hash tick.period times:

   v = tick.value
   for i = 1 to tick.period:
       v = Hash(HashChainInput(v))

6.  Compare the result with anchor from the HashChainAnchorInfo.  If
    they do not match, reject the certificate with a bad_certificate
    error.

   If all steps succeed, the hash chain verification passes, confirming
   that the CA has not revoked this certificate as of the indicated
   period.

7.  Tick Distribution

   The CA MUST provide a mechanism for authenticating parties to obtain
   current hash chain ticks.  This document defines an HTTP interface
   for this purpose.

7.1.  HTTP Interface

   The CA (or a mirror) serves ticks over HTTP.  Given a tick base URL
   for the CA (see Section 7.2), the tick for a particular certificate
   is fetched from:

   GET {tick_base_url}/.well-known/mtcrs/tick/{entry_hash}

   where {entry_hash} is the lowercase hex-encoded SHA-256 hash of the
   certificate's TBSCertificateLogEntry, computed over exactly the same
   octets that the base specification commits to the Merkle Tree for
   that entry (the tbs_cert_entry_data byte string defined by
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs], i.e. the encoded contents of the
   entry with no enclosing tag or length prefix), so that the CA and the
   authenticating party derive an identical value. entry_hash is always
   computed with SHA-256, even for a CA whose Merkle Tree uses a
   different hash function: it is only a stable identifier for the tick
   URL, not a tree leaf hash.  The authenticating party computes
   {entry_hash} from the TBSCertificateLogEntry it already possesses; no
   additional per-request metadata from the CA is required.

   The tick base URL is not derived from the CA's identifier.  A Merkle
   Tree CA is identified by a TrustAnchorID, which is a relative object
   identifier (Section 5.1 of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs])
   rather than a hostname, so it cannot be turned into an origin.  The
   base URL is instead conveyed to the authenticating party out of band,
   as described in Section 7.2.

   The scheme (http:// or https://) is whatever the CA specifies as part
   of the base URL.  Because each tick is self-authenticating (the
   relying party verifies it by hashing it forward to the anchor
   committed in the Merkle Tree), the tick fetch does not require
   transport-layer integrity, and because the tick value is public, it
   does not require transport-layer confidentiality of the response
   body.  CAs MAY therefore publish an http:// base URL, which
   eliminates TLS handshake overhead and permits caching by any HTTP
   intermediary.  The one property plain HTTP does not provide is
   confidentiality of the request itself: an on-path observer can see
   which {entry_hash} is being requested.  CAs whose deployments
   consider this metadata sensitive SHOULD publish an https:// base URL
   instead.

   For example, if a CA's tick base URL is http://mtcrs.ca.example,
   ticks are served at:

   http://mtcrs.ca.example/.well-known/mtcrs/tick/a1b2c3...f0

   The base URL is an origin (scheme, host, and optional port); the
   .well-known/mtcrs/tick/{entry_hash} path is rooted at that origin.  A
   CA MAY point that origin's hostname at a CDN or mirror through
   ordinary DNS or HTTP routing, so no path prefix is needed.

7.2.  Discovering the Tick Base URL

   Because the CA's TrustAnchorID is an identifier and not a locator,
   the tick base URL MUST be conveyed to the authenticating party out of
   band.  This is not a gap: the authenticating party already obtains
   its certificate through a provisioning channel that involves a real
   CA endpoint (for example, an ACME directory), so that channel is the
   natural carrier for the base URL, and no locator need be derived from
   the certificate.

   A CA MUST make the tick base URL available through at least one of
   the following mechanisms, and an authenticating party MUST support at
   least the provisioning-channel mechanism appropriate to how it
   obtains certificates:

   *  *Provisioning channel (primary).* The base URL is delivered when
      the certificate is provisioned.  Section 7.3 defines this for
      ACME.  CAs using other issuance protocols MUST provide an
      equivalent mechanism; the details are out of scope for this
      document.

   *  *CA certificate SIA (optional).* The base URL MAY additionally be
      published in the CA's certificate representation (Section 5.5 of
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]) using the id-ad-mtcrsTicks
      Subject Information Access access method defined in Section 10,
      whose accessLocation is a uniformResourceIdentifier giving the
      tick base URL.  This carries a single per-CA URL on a single
      object, adds no per-log-entry bytes, and provides a protocol-
      independent record that an authenticating party (or its tooling)
      can read once.  When both mechanisms are present and disagree, the
      provisioning-channel value takes precedence.  This mechanism
      carries only the base URL, so it does not apply when unguessable
      tick URLs (Section 7.4) are used; in that case the full per-
      certificate URL is delivered through the provisioning channel and
      the SIA SHOULD NOT be published.

   Keeping the base URL out of the certificate is deliberate, but it is
   not a secrecy measure: as Section 9.4 explains, the URL is derivable
   by anyone holding the certificate, so a relying party could construct
   it regardless.  The point is not to hide the URL but to avoid
   standardizing or advertising a per-certificate fetch affordance to
   relying parties in a field they routinely parse.  Relying parties
   verify the embedded tick offline against the committed anchor
   (Section 6) and MUST NOT fetch ticks (Section 9.4); only the
   authenticating party is given the base URL through provisioning,
   because only it needs to refresh the value it presents.

   Because MTC certificates are renewed frequently (Section 10.4 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] recommends renewal at about 75%
   of lifetime), a CA that migrates its tick infrastructure can update
   the base URL it hands out and rely on renewals to propagate the
   change, optionally serving HTTP redirects from the old origin in the
   meantime.

7.3.  ACME Integration

   When the CA issues certificates via ACME, it SHOULD convey the tick
   base URL in the ACME order object as a new field:

   "tickBaseURL": "https://mtcrs.cdn.ca.example"

   The tickBaseURL field contains the base URL (an origin) from which
   the authenticating party derives its tick fetch URL, by appending
   /.well-known/mtcrs/tick/{entry_hash} (Section 7).  A single value
   covers all of the CA's certificates and lets the CA direct
   authenticating parties to a CDN, regional mirror, or any origin,
   without adding bytes to the certificate or log entry.

   If the tickBaseURL field is absent from the ACME order, the
   authenticating party obtains the base URL through another mechanism
   in Section 7.2 (for example, the CA certificate SIA).

   CAs using issuance protocols other than ACME SHOULD provide an
   equivalent mechanism for communicating the tick base URL during
   certificate provisioning.

7.4.  Unguessable Tick URLs

   The tick fetch path described above is .well-known/mtcrs/
   tick/{entry_hash}, and {entry_hash} is derivable from the certificate
   by anyone who holds it, including a relying party (Section 9.4).
   Keeping the base URL out of the certificate therefore does not make
   the tick URL unguessable.  A CA that wishes to make relying-party
   fetching infeasible by construction, rather than only forbidding it
   normatively, MAY replace the derivable path component with an
   unguessable per-certificate capability token:

   {tick_base_url}/.well-known/mtcrs/tick/{tick_token}

   tick_token:  A high-entropy (at least 128-bit) value that does not
      appear anywhere in the certificate.  Because the token is absent
      from the certificate, a relying party cannot construct the URL,
      while the authenticating party is given it at provisioning time
      (see below).

   The CA MAY generate the token by either of the following methods:

   *  *Random, with server-side state.* The CA generates a random token
      per certificate and maps it to the corresponding hash chain.  This
      adds one indexed lookup to the CA's existing per-certificate
      state.

   *  *Deterministic, stateless (RECOMMENDED).* The CA derives the token
      by applying a deterministic authenticated encryption scheme (for
      example, AES-SIV [RFC5297]) keyed by a CA-held secret to the entry
      identifier:

      tick_token = key_id || DAE(K_ca, entry_hash)

      The CA recovers entry_hash by decrypting the token, so no
      additional per-certificate state is required.  The token is
      unguessable without K_ca and is stable for the certificate's
      lifetime, which preserves caching.  The key_id prefix identifies
      K_ca so that it can be rotated; the CA retains superseded keys for
      decryption during an overlap window, and because MTC certificates
      are renewed frequently (Section 10.4 of
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]), rotated tokens propagate
      through renewal, as for base-URL migration (Section 7.2).

   When this hardening is used, discovery is necessarily per-
   certificate: the CA delivers the complete tick URL (base URL and
   token together) to the authenticating party through the provisioning
   channel.  For ACME, the order object carries the full URL in a
   tickURL field in place of tickBaseURL (Section 7.3).  The CA-
   certificate SIA (Section 7.2) conveys only the per-CA base URL, which
   cannot locate a token-addressed tick, and only the provisioning
   channel carries the token.  The SIA therefore provides no operational
   value when unguessable tick URLs are used, and a CA that uses them
   SHOULD NOT publish the id-ad-mtcrsTicks access method.

   This hardening preserves the properties of the base HTTP interface.
   Each token addresses a value that is immutable within a period, so
   per-period caching and CDN distribution (Section 7.7) are unchanged.
   The token is an addressing capability, not a confidentiality secret:
   the tick it locates is public and self-authenticating, so the fetch
   still requires no transport-layer integrity or confidentiality and
   MAY be served over plain HTTP.

   The token is a bearer capability, and this hardening is defense in
   depth rather than a hard security boundary.  An authenticating party
   could disclose the token, and an on-path observer of a plain-HTTP
   fetch can see it; but possession of the token grants only the ability
   to fetch a public, self-authenticating non-revocation value (or to
   observe its absence).  It does not permit forging ticks, which
   requires the secret chain values (Section 9), nor use of the
   certificate, which requires the corresponding private key.  Its
   benefit is that a relying party, or a third party holding a captured
   certificate, can no longer derive the tick URL from the certificate
   and probe the CA for its status (Section 9.4).

7.5.  Response Format

   The response body is the serialized HashChainTick structure: a 4-byte
   big-endian period followed by HASH_SIZE bytes of value (36 bytes
   total for SHA-256).  The response Content-Type MUST be application/
   octet-stream.

   A successful response MUST use HTTP status code 200.  If the
   certificate has been revoked (no tick will be issued), the CA MUST
   respond with HTTP status code 404.

   The CA SHOULD set HTTP cache headers with a max-age no longer than
   revocation_period seconds.  For example:

   Cache-Control: public, max-age=3600

7.6.  Operational Model

   The authenticating party periodically fetches its current tick from
   the CA:

   1.  At least once per revocation_period, the authenticating party
       fetches its updated HashChainTick.

   2.  The authenticating party updates the HashChainTick carried in its
       certificate's MTCProof (signatureValue) with the newly fetched
       value.  The inclusion proof and cosignatures remain unchanged.

   3.  During TLS handshakes, the authenticating party presents the
       certificate with the current tick.

   If the authenticating party is unable to obtain a fresh tick (e.g.,
   due to CA unavailability), it continues to serve the most recent tick
   until that tick's period expires.  After expiry, the certificate
   becomes unusable until a fresh tick is obtained or a new certificate
   is provisioned.

   At large deployment scale, tick distribution is dominated by
   aggregate request volume rather than per-request cost.  A CA serving
   10^9 active certificates with a one-hour period sees on the order of
   10^5 to 10^6 tick requests per second, and this load tends to
   concentrate at period boundaries if authenticating parties refresh in
   lockstep.  At this scale, edge caching (each tick is immutable within
   its period and cacheable for up to revocation_period seconds) and
   spreading of client refresh timing are required, not merely
   recommended, to avoid a thundering-herd load on the origin.
   Section 7.7 describes recommended techniques.

7.7.  Distributing Tick Requests

   Because a relying party also accepts a tick for the immediately
   preceding period (Section 6), an authenticating party has up to one
   full revocation_period of slack in which to fetch each new tick and
   need not fetch at the period boundary.  Two complementary mechanisms
   exploit this slack to prevent a period-boundary thundering herd.

7.7.1.  Client-Side: Deterministic Per-Entry Offset

   Rather than fetching at the start of each period, an authenticating
   party SHOULD fetch at a fixed offset into the period derived
   deterministically from its own entry_hash:

   offset = UINT32(entry_hash[0..3]) mod revocation_period

   where entry_hash is the binary (pre-hex-encoding) SHA-256 hash of the
   TBSCertificateLogEntry and UINT32 interprets its first four bytes as
   a big-endian unsigned integer.  The authenticating party fetches the
   current period's tick at (period_start + offset), where period_start
   is the start time of that period.  During the first offset seconds of
   the period it continues to serve the preceding period's tick, which
   remains valid under the grace window, so any offset less than
   revocation_period introduces no verification risk.

   Because entry hashes are uniformly distributed, deriving the offset
   this way spreads fetches uniformly across the period with no
   coordination, shared state, or central scheduler, and the offset is
   stable from period to period, which aids caching and diagnosis.  This
   is preferable to independent random jitter, which can still cluster
   and which varies each period.

7.7.2.  Server-Side: Cache Freshness and Retry-After

   The CA (or an edge cache) SHOULD serve each tick with a Cache-Control
   max-age no longer than revocation_period seconds (Section 7.5), so
   that a caching layer collapses many client requests for the same
   entry into a single origin fetch per period.  A CA MAY additionally
   apply a small per-response jitter to max-age so that cache entries
   for different entries do not all expire simultaneously.

   Under transient overload, the CA or edge MAY respond with HTTP status
   code 429 (Too Many Requests) or 503 (Service Unavailable) together
   with a Retry-After header indicating when the authenticating party
   should retry.  To avoid a synchronized second wave, the CA SHOULD
   randomize Retry-After values across clients rather than returning a
   single fixed value.  Because the authenticating party retains its
   previously fetched tick, which remains valid until the end of the
   current period, backing off in response to Retry-After does not
   interrupt service, provided a fresh tick is obtained before the
   previous one expires.

8.  Privacy Considerations

   The Privacy Considerations of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]
   (Section 11) apply to Merkle Tree Certificates that use this
   mechanism.  This mechanism adds one network interaction -- the
   authenticating party's periodic tick fetch (Section 7) -- and
   deliberately adds none on the relying-party side.

   No relying-party activity is exposed.  The current tick is embedded
   in the certificate presentation and verified offline against the
   committed anchor, and relying parties MUST NOT fetch ticks
   (Section 9.4).  Consequently the CA learns nothing about which
   certificates a relying party validates or which sites it visits.
   This is the central privacy difference from client-driven OCSP
   [RFC6960], whose status fetches revealed relying-party browsing to
   the CA; that failure mode is avoided here by construction rather than
   by policy.

   The authenticating party's tick fetch, by contrast, exposes request
   metadata.  An on-path observer of a tick fetch, or the CA (or CDN)
   serving it, sees which entry_hash -- or, with unguessable tick URLs,
   which tick_token (Section 7.4) -- is being requested, and can thereby
   learn which certificate the authenticating party holds.  For a
   public-facing server this reveals little, since the certificate it
   serves is itself public; the request identifies the authenticating
   party's own certificate, not any relying party.  Two points
   nonetheless bear noting:

   *  Because a tick is self-authenticating and public, the fetch does
      not require transport-layer confidentiality for correctness, so a
      CA MAY serve ticks over plain HTTP (Section 7).  Plain HTTP leaves
      the requested entry_hash or tick_token visible to on-path
      observers.  A deployment that considers this metadata sensitive --
      for example, one serving certificates that are not otherwise
      publicly enumerable -- SHOULD publish an https base URL instead.

   *  Unguessable tick URLs (Section 7.4) are an addressing and access-
      control measure, not a confidentiality one: the tick_token appears
      in the request URL, so it offers no confidentiality against an
      observer of the authenticating party's own fetch.  Its privacy
      benefit is solely that a relying party, or a third party holding
      only the certificate, cannot derive the URL and probe the CA for
      the certificate's status (Section 9.4).

9.  Security Considerations

9.1.  Hash Function Requirements

   The security of this mechanism depends on the preimage resistance of
   the hash function used.  SHA-256 [SHS] provides 256 bits of preimage
   resistance, which is sufficient for all foreseeable certificate
   lifetimes.  With a one-hour revocation_period and a 47-day lifetime,
   the chain length is 1,128, which does not meaningfully degrade the
   security margin.

9.2.  Seed Confidentiality

   The CA MUST keep the hash chain seed (h[0]) and all not-yet-revealed
   chain values confidential.  Compromise of these values would allow an
   attacker to produce future ticks, defeating revocation.

   If the CA's seed storage is compromised, the CA MUST revoke all
   affected certificates via the base MTC revocation mechanism (revoked
   ranges of serial numbers) as a fallback.

9.3.  Denial of Service via Tick Withholding

   A compromised or malicious CA could withhold ticks from a legitimate
   authenticating party, effectively denying service.  This is analogous
   to a CA refusing to issue OCSP responses and is mitigated by the same
   market forces: an authenticating party that cannot obtain ticks will
   switch to another CA.

   Additionally, since ticks are small (36 bytes), they can be
   efficiently distributed via CDN, reducing the attack surface for tick
   withholding.

9.4.  Relying Parties Do Not Fetch Ticks

   The current tick is embedded in the MTCProof presented during the
   handshake and is verified offline against the anchor committed in the
   Merkle Tree (Section 6).  A relying party therefore has no need to
   contact the CA, and MUST NOT fetch ticks or otherwise use the tick
   distribution endpoint as an online revocation responder.

   This is a privacy and availability protection, not a secrecy one.
   The tick distribution URL is not secret: the fetch path is .well-
   known/mtcrs/tick/{entry_hash} with {entry_hash} computable by anyone
   holding the certificate, and the origin is low-entropy and, when the
   CA certificate SIA (Section 7.2) is used, available to relying
   parties as well.  By default the design does not, and cannot,
   technically prevent a relying party from constructing the URL and
   fetching; it declines to standardize or advertise such a fetch as an
   affordance to relying parties.  A CA that wishes to remove this
   derivability entirely MAY use the optional per-certificate
   capability-token hardening in Section 7.4, which makes the tick URL
   unguessable to a party holding only the certificate.  A relying-party
   fetch would gain nothing over the embedded tick -- the authenticating
   party already presents the current value -- while reintroducing the
   CA-visibility of relying-party activity (the CA learning which sites
   a relying party visits), the added latency, and the soft-fail
   behaviour that made client-driven OCSP [RFC6960] problematic.

   The CA certificate SIA access method (Section 7.2) exists to convey
   the base URL to authenticating-party tooling.  Relying parties
   possess the CA certificate but MUST NOT use its tick base URL to
   fetch tick status.

9.5.  Unauthenticated Proof Extensions

   The RECOMMENDED trailing status_tick encoding (Section 5.1.1) appends
   a fixed-size, fully verified value and so adds no general "ignore if
   unknown" region.  If the base specification instead adopts the
   alternative proof_extensions encoding (Appendix G), note that this
   field is not committed to the Merkle Tree and is covered by no
   signature: it is mutable and can carry data that relying parties
   ignore.  Hash chain revocation does not rely on its authenticity --
   the tick is self-authenticating and its presence is mandated by the
   committed id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension.  Appendix G.5 discusses
   the general risks of this field (bloat, covert channels, and a
   strippable soft-fail for other mechanisms) and the constraints
   recommended for the base specification.

9.6.  Interaction with Base MTC Revocation

   The hash chain mechanism complements rather than replaces the base
   MTC revoked ranges mechanism.  Revoked ranges provide a fallback for
   scenarios where the hash chain mechanism is insufficient:

   *  Compromise of the CA's hash chain seed storage

   *  Bulk revocation of many certificates simultaneously

   *  Relying parties that have not yet implemented hash chain
      verification

   Relying parties that support both mechanisms SHOULD check both: a
   certificate is considered revoked if either mechanism indicates
   revocation.

9.7.  Clock Skew

   Verification step 4 accepts a tick whose period is the verifier's
   expected_period, the immediately preceding period (expected_period -
   1), or the immediately following period (expected_period + 1).  This
   tolerates a verifier clock that is behind or ahead of the
   authenticating party's by up to one full revocation_period in either
   direction, and also an authenticating party that is still serving the
   previous period's tick for caching or staggered refresh
   (Section 7.7).

   The two directions are not equivalent in cost.  Accepting the
   immediately following period -- what a verifier whose clock is behind
   will see -- costs nothing in revocation terms: that tick is a fresher
   non-revocation proof than the verifier expected, and a tick for a
   period the CA has not yet reached cannot be forged (preimage
   resistance; Section 9).  Accepting the immediately preceding period
   -- a verifier clock that is ahead, or a deliberately stale tick --
   accepts a non-revocation proof up to one revocation_period old, which
   is the intended one-period grace.

   Deployments with known clock-skew or availability concerns MAY widen
   the window: accepting further preceding periods tolerates a tick-
   distribution outage (Appendix F) at the cost of correspondingly
   delayed revocation enforcement, while accepting further following
   periods tolerates a verifier clock that runs further behind and
   carries no revocation cost.

10.  IANA Considerations

10.1.  Module Identifier

   IANA is requested to register the following entry in the "SMI
   Security for PKIX Module Identifier" registry:

              +=========+===================+===============+
              | Decimal | Description       | Reference     |
              +=========+===================+===============+
              | TBD     | id-mod-mtcrs-2026 | This document |
              +---------+-------------------+---------------+

                                  Table 1

10.2.  Certificate Extension

   IANA is requested to register the following entry in the "SMI
   Security for PKIX Certificate Extension" registry:

            +=========+=======================+===============+
            | Decimal | Description           | Reference     |
            +=========+=======================+===============+
            | TBD     | id-pe-hashChainAnchor | This document |
            +---------+-----------------------+---------------+

                                  Table 2

10.3.  Access Descriptor

   IANA is requested to register the following entry in the "SMI
   Security for PKIX Access Descriptor" registry:

              +=========+==================+===============+
              | Decimal | Description      | Reference     |
              +=========+==================+===============+
              | TBD     | id-ad-mtcrsTicks | This document |
              +---------+------------------+---------------+

                                 Table 3

   The id-ad-mtcrsTicks access method is used as a Subject Information
   Access access method ([RFC5280]) in a Merkle Tree CA certificate
   (Section 5.5 of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]).  Its
   accessLocation is a uniformResourceIdentifier giving the CA's tick
   base URL (Section 7.2).

   id-ad-mtcrsTicks OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-ad TBD }

10.4.  Well-Known URI

   IANA is requested to register the following entry in the "Well-Known
   URIs" registry ([RFC8615]):

        +=============+===========================================+
        | Field       | Value                                     |
        +=============+===========================================+
        | URI Suffix  | mtcrs                                     |
        +-------------+-------------------------------------------+
        | Change      | IETF                                      |
        | Controller  |                                           |
        +-------------+-------------------------------------------+
        | Reference   | This document                             |
        +-------------+-------------------------------------------+
        | Status      | permanent                                 |
        +-------------+-------------------------------------------+
        | Related     | Path prefix for the MTCRS tick            |
        | Information | distribution HTTP interface: /.well-      |
        |             | known/mtcrs/tick/{entry_hash} (Section 7) |
        +-------------+-------------------------------------------+

                                  Table 4

10.5.  ACME Order Object Fields

   IANA is requested to register the following entries in the "ACME
   Order Object Fields" registry ([RFC8555]):

        +=============+============+==============+===============+
        | Field Name  | Field Type | Configurable | Reference     |
        +=============+============+==============+===============+
        | tickBaseURL | string     | false        | This document |
        +-------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
        | tickURL     | string     | false        | This document |
        +-------------+------------+--------------+---------------+

                                  Table 5

   Both fields are set by the server in the order object; neither is
   configurable by the client in a newOrder request.  A CA uses
   tickBaseURL for the derivable tick URL scheme (Section 7.3) and
   tickURL for the unguessable per-certificate URL scheme (Section 7.4);
   the two are mutually exclusive for a given order.

10.6.  MTCProof Extension Type

   The proof-extension encoding of the tick (Section 5.1.2) relies on an
   MTCProofExtensionType code point, hash_chain_tick(0), within a
   proof_extensions field that the base MTC specification does not
   currently define (Appendix G).  This document does not create an
   MTCProofExtensionType registry.  If the base MTC specification
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] adopts the proof_extensions
   mechanism, it -- not this document -- is expected to establish the
   corresponding IANA registry, following the allocation policy
   recommended in Appendix G.5.  This document requests that, in that
   event, the value hash_chain_tick be allocated in that registry with a
   reference to this document.  When the RECOMMENDED trailing
   status_tick encoding (Section 5.1.1) is used instead, no such
   registry or code point is required.

11.  References

11.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]
              Benjamin, D., O'Brien, D., Westerbaan, B., Valenta, L.,
              and F. Valsorda, "Merkle Tree Certificates", July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-plants-
              merkle-tree-certs/>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

   [RFC5912]  Hoffman, P. and J. Schaad, "New ASN.1 Modules for the
              Public Key Infrastructure Using X.509 (PKIX)", RFC 5912,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5912, June 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5912>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8446]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 8446, DOI 10.17487/RFC8446, August 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8446>.

   [RFC8555]  Barnes, R., Hoffman-Andrews, J., McCarney, D., and J.
              Kasten, "Automatic Certificate Management Environment
              (ACME)", RFC 8555, DOI 10.17487/RFC8555, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8555>.

   [RFC8615]  Nottingham, M., "Well-Known Uniform Resource Identifiers
              (URIs)", RFC 8615, DOI 10.17487/RFC8615, May 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8615>.

   [SHS]      National Institute of Standards and Technology (U.S.),
              "Secure Hash Standard", 2015,
              <https://doi.org/10.6028/nist.fips.180-4>.

11.2.  Informative References

   [ALMOST-OPTIMAL]
              Coppersmith, D. and M. Jakobsson, "Almost Optimal Hash
              Sequence Traversal", 2002,
              <https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36504-4_8>.

   [CHROME-MTC]
              Google Chrome, "Chrome MTC Policy", 2025,
              <https://googlechrome.github.io/CertificateTransparency/
              mtc_policy.html>.

   [CRLite]   Larisch, J., Choffnes, D., Levin, D., Maggs, B., Mislove,
              A., and C. Wilson, "CRLite: A Scalable System for Pushing
              All TLS Revocations to All Browsers", May 2017,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/sp.2017.17>.

   [CRLSets]  Chromium, "CRLSets", August 2022,
              <https://www.chromium.org/Home/chromium-security/
              crlsets/>.

   [FRACTAL]  Jakobsson, M., "Fractal Hash Sequence Representation and
              Traversal", 2002,
              <https://doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2002.1023709>.

   [MICALI]   Micali, S., "Efficient Certificate Revocation", 1996,
              <https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/889659>.

   [RFC5297]  Harkins, D., "Synthetic Initialization Vector (SIV)
              Authenticated Encryption Using the Advanced Encryption
              Standard (AES)", RFC 5297, DOI 10.17487/RFC5297, October
              2008, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5297>.

   [RFC6960]  Santesson, S., Myers, M., Ankney, R., Malpani, A.,
              Galperin, S., and C. Adams, "X.509 Internet Public Key
              Infrastructure Online Certificate Status Protocol - OCSP",
              RFC 6960, DOI 10.17487/RFC6960, June 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6960>.

   [RFC6962]  Laurie, B., Langley, A., and E. Kasper, "Certificate
              Transparency", RFC 6962, DOI 10.17487/RFC6962, June 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6962>.

   [RFC7633]  Hallam-Baker, P., "X.509v3 Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Feature Extension", RFC 7633, DOI 10.17487/RFC7633,
              October 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7633>.

   [SHORTLIVED]
              Engineering at Meta, "How Meta uses short-lived
              certificates to protect TLS secrets", August 2023,
              <https://engineering.fb.com/2023/08/07/security/short-
              lived-certificates-protect-tls-secrets/>.

Appendix A.  ASN.1 Module

   This appendix provides an ASN.1 module for the structures this
   document defines, following the conventions of [RFC5912].

   MTCRS-2026
     { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
       id-mod-mtcrs-2026(TBD) }

   DEFINITIONS IMPLICIT TAGS ::= BEGIN

   IMPORTS
     EXTENSION
     FROM PKIX-CommonTypes-2009 -- in [RFC5912]
       { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
         security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) id-mod(0)
         id-mod-pkixCommon-02(57) } ;

   -- PKIX arcs

   id-pkix OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::=
     { iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1)
       security(5) mechanisms(5) pkix(7) }

   id-pe OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 1 }
   id-ad OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pkix 48 }

   -- Hash chain anchor certificate extension

   ext-hashChainAnchor EXTENSION ::= {
     SYNTAX HashChainAnchorInfo
     IDENTIFIED BY id-pe-hashChainAnchor
     CRITICALITY { TRUE | FALSE } }

   id-pe-hashChainAnchor OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-pe TBD }

   HashChainAnchorInfo ::= SEQUENCE {
     revocationPeriod  INTEGER (1..MAX) DEFAULT 3600,
     anchor            OCTET STRING }

   -- Tick distribution Subject Information Access method

   id-ad-mtcrsTicks OBJECT IDENTIFIER ::= { id-ad TBD }

   END

   The id-mod-mtcrs-2026, id-pe-hashChainAnchor, and id-ad-mtcrsTicks
   arcs contain TBD values to be replaced with the OIDs assigned by IANA
   (Section 10).

Appendix B.  Hash Chain Input Encoding

   The HashChainInput structure provides domain separation for hash
   chain computations:

   struct {
       uint8 label[7] = "MTCRS\n\0";
       TrustAnchorID issuer_id<1..2^8-1>;
       uint16 log_number;
       uint48 index;
       HashValue preimage;
   } HashChainInput;

   label:  A fixed ASCII string providing domain separation from other
      uses of the hash function in MTC, so that a chain value cannot be
      reinterpreted as, or collide with, another MTC hash computation
      (for example, a Merkle Tree leaf or node hash).  The trailing
      "\n\0" follows the convention of the base MTC specification's
      label ("subtree/v1\n\0"); the NUL terminator keeps the MTC label
      space prefix-free, so no label can be a prefix of another.  The
      label's length is not otherwise security-relevant, and this short
      value keeps a typical HashChainInput within a single hash
      compression block.

   issuer_id:  The CA's trust anchor ID.

   log_number:  The log number of the issuance log containing this
      entry.

   index:  The entry's index within the issuance log.

   preimage:  The previous hash chain value being hashed.

   The issuer_id, log_number, and index fields together identify the log
   entry and act as a per-entry salt, placing each certificate's chain
   in a distinct hash domain.  This salting is not load-bearing for the
   core guarantee: each chain already starts from an independent,
   cryptographically random seed, and the anchor committed in the
   certificate (Section 4) binds each revealed value to that specific
   chain.  Its contribution is defense in depth.  It keeps chains
   distinct even if a seed-generation fault were to repeat a seed across
   entries, and it frustrates any amortized precomputation that would
   otherwise target the whole population of chains at once (the same
   rationale as salting).

   The Hash function is the same hash function used by the Merkle Tree
   CA (SHA-256 for CAs using SHA-256).

Appendix C.  Test Vectors

   This appendix gives a worked example that pins down the exact
   HashChainInput byte layout (Appendix B) and hashing order.  All
   values are hexadecimal, and the hash function is SHA-256 (HASH_SIZE =
   32).

   The example uses:

   *  issuer_id: TrustAnchorID 32473.1, whose binary representation is
      81fd5901; as a <1..2^8-1> vector it encodes with its length prefix
      as 04 81fd5901.

   *  log_number = 1

   *  index = 42

   *  chain_length = 5

   *  seed h[0] = the 32 bytes 00 01 ... 1f (a fixed value for this
      example; a real CA uses a cryptographically random, secret seed)

   The fixed fields of HashChainInput therefore encode as:

   label       4d544352530a00        ("MTCRS\n\0")
   issuer_id   0481fd5901
   log_number  0001
   index       00000000002a

   Each step computes h[i] = SHA-256(HashChainInput(h[i-1])), where
   HashChainInput(preimage) is the concatenation label || issuer_id ||
   log_number || index || preimage.  For example, HashChainInput(h[0])
   is the following 52 bytes:

   4d544352530a000481fd5901000100000000002a000102030405060708090a0b
   0c0d0e0f101112131415161718191a1b1c1d1e1f

   The resulting chain is:

  h[0]  000102030405060708090a0b0c0d0e0f101112131415161718191a1b1c1d1e1f
  h[1]  a99c801b389eed84c31eb04c970d2fbe63608bbd8911d54e63eb7f18adcf286a
  h[2]  8721e95cbd26d1f2789c859d89858ca1c37193f0772aa171da6f02b71acb51cd
  h[3]  4dab657fef30e247ed04565cbfc0ba1f7c977df06544563e9dc5a697c9d21ec4
  h[4]  b8c0f6b6aac2f65177c9c2481e50b1070cfd31a348f27f94d5318ecfea385aca
  h[5]  f855b7134602eee167305c1a0314ffbf435c8d1b2e49ee3e7b18cd445bdeb234

   The anchor committed in the certificate is h[chain_length] = h[5].

   For period t = 2, the CA reveals h[chain_length - t] = h[3].  The
   HashChainTick is { period = 2, value = h[3] }, which serializes (a
   4-byte big-endian period followed by the 32-byte value; Section 7.5)
   as the following 36 bytes:

   000000024dab657fef30e247ed04565cbfc0ba1f7c977df06544563e9dc5a697
   c9d21ec4

   To verify, a relying party hashes tick.value forward tick.period (2)
   times (Section 6):

   v0 = h[3] = 4dab657f...c9d21ec4
   v1 = SHA-256(HashChainInput(v0)) = b8c0f6b6...ea385aca  (= h[4])
   v2 = SHA-256(HashChainInput(v1)) = f855b713...5bdeb234  (= h[5])

   v2 equals the anchor h[5], so verification succeeds.

Appendix D.  Design Rationale

   This section provides rationale for the choices made in this
   document.

D.1.  Why Hash Chains (Micali) Instead of Other Revocation Mechanisms

   Hash chains [MICALI] were selected because they are the only known
   mechanism that simultaneously provides:

   1.  *Self-authentication:* The tick is verified against data already
       committed in the Merkle Tree (the anchor).  No additional
       signatures, certificates, or trust relationships are needed.

   2.  *Zero CA signing load:* Each revocation period, the CA reveals a
       precomputed value.  There is no per-certificate, per-period
       signing operation.  This is critical for CAs with millions of
       active certificates.

   3.  *Mandatory enforcement:* Because the tick is structurally part of
       the certificate presentation, relying parties can hard-fail on
       its absence.  This avoids the soft-fail problem that plagued
       OCSP.

   4.  *Minimal bandwidth:* 36 bytes per handshake (4-byte period +
       32-byte hash value).

   5.  *Simple implementation:* The mechanism requires only a hash
       function and basic arithmetic.  No new cryptographic primitives
       are introduced.

D.2.  Why One Hour (or One Day) Periods

   A one-hour revocation_period provides a good balance:

   *  *Revocation latency:* A compromised key is unusable within at most
      two hours (current period + grace period).

   *  *Operational feasibility:* Authenticating parties must fetch a new
      tick once per hour.  This is a trivial HTTP request for a 36-byte
      response.

   *  *Chain length:* For 47-day certificates, the chain length is
      1,128.  Verification requires at most 1,127 hash computations,
      which takes microseconds on modern hardware.

   *  *CA storage:* The CA must store one seed per active certificate.
      With 32 bytes per seed, 1 billion certificates require 32 GB.

   A one-day period is also viable, reducing operational frequency at
   the cost of up to 48-hour revocation latency.  Deployments SHOULD
   choose the shortest period operationally feasible.

D.3.  CA-Side Storage and Computation Trade-off

   A CA does not have to choose between the two naive extremes for
   managing each certificate's hash chain of length chain_length
   (denoted L below):

   *  *Store the entire chain:* O(L) storage per certificate, but each
      revealed value is a free lookup.  For L = 2160 (a 90-day lifetime
      with a one-hour period), this is roughly 67.5 KiB per certificate,
      or about 69 TB across 1 billion certificates.

   *  *Store only the seed:* O(1) storage per certificate, but
      recomputing the value revealed in period t costs up to L hash
      evaluations (L/2 on average).  Over a certificate's lifetime this
      is O(L^2) hashing.

   A CA MAY instead use *fractal hash-chain traversal* [FRACTAL]
   [ALMOST-OPTIMAL] to obtain a logarithmic middle ground.  The chain is
   revealed in reverse of the order in which it is computed (the CA
   computes h[1..L] forward from the secret seed h[0], but reveals
   h[L-1], h[L-2], ..., h[1] over time), which is exactly the setting
   these algorithms address.  Instead of the whole chain or just the
   seed, the CA maintains a small set of precomputed helper values
   ("pebbles") parked at self-similar positions along the chain.  When
   the value for the current period is needed, a pebble is already
   there; between periods the CA spends a small fixed budget of hash
   evaluations advancing the more distant pebbles toward the positions
   where they will next be needed.  The scheduling guarantees:

   storage  ~ log2(L)      hash values per certificate
   work     ~ (1/2) log2(L) hash evaluations per revealed value

   For L = 2160, this is approximately 11 to 12 stored values (~384
   bytes) per certificate and about 6 hash evaluations per period.
   Across 1 billion certificates that is roughly 384 GB of state and, if
   the traversal is advanced once per period and the resulting value
   served to all requests in that period, on the order of 10^6 hash
   evaluations per second in aggregate.  This dominates a simple square-
   root checkpoint scheme (which would need ~1.5 TB and up to ~46 hashes
   per value) on both axes, and turns the seed-only extreme's O(L^2)
   lifetime cost into O(L log L).

   This is purely a CA-side implementation choice: the on-the-wire tick
   and the relying party's verification procedure (Section 6) are
   unchanged.  The pebbles are unrevealed chain values and therefore
   carry the same confidentiality requirement as the seed (Section 9).

D.4.  Why Embed the Tick in the MTCProof

   The tick is embedded directly in the MTCProof (the certificate's
   signatureValue) rather than delivered via a separate channel because:

   1.  *Structurally inseparable:* The tick is part of the certificate
       itself.  A relying party that parses the MTCProof will always
       encounter the tick.  There is no possibility of the tick being
       stripped or omitted in transit.

   2.  *No new protocol machinery:* No TLS CertificateEntry extension or
       other signaling mechanism is needed.  The tick travels inside the
       existing certificate structure, requiring no changes to TLS
       implementations beyond MTC support.

   3.  *Safe to update dynamically:* The MTCProof is not committed to
       the Merkle Tree — only the TBSCertificateLogEntry is.  The
       authenticating party can freely replace the signatureValue each
       period without invalidating the inclusion proof or cosignatures.

   4.  *No additional round-trips:* The tick travels with the
       certificate in the same TLS message.  No DNS lookups or side-
       channel fetches are needed by the relying party.

   5.  *Server must participate:* The authenticating party is already
       responsible for maintaining its MTC certificate and refreshing it
       before expiry.  Adding a lightweight hourly tick refresh is an
       incremental burden, not a new class of operational requirement.

D.5.  Comparison with OCSP Stapling

   OCSP stapling delivers a CA-signed status response inside the TLS
   handshake, and is the closest existing analogue to this mechanism.
   It has nonetheless failed to become an enforceable revocation
   channel, for reasons this mechanism is specifically designed to
   avoid.

D.5.1.  Why OCSP Stapling Is Not Enforceable

   OCSP stapling ([RFC6960], carried via the TLS status_request
   extension) is optional and strippable: the client requests it, and
   the server -- or a network attacker -- can omit the stapled response
   with no signal that one was expected.  A relying party therefore
   cannot distinguish a deliberately stripped response from a
   temporarily unavailable responder, so it must soft-fail (treat
   missing status as "not revoked") to avoid breaking legitimate
   connections.  Soft-fail, in turn, provides almost no protection
   against an active attacker, who can simply suppress the response.
   This is a self-reinforcing loop: because enforcement is impossible,
   stapling yields little security benefit; because it yields little
   benefit, servers have weak incentive to deploy it; and because
   deployment is incomplete, relying parties can never move from soft-
   fail to hard-fail.

   OCSP Must-Staple ([RFC7633]) was introduced to break this loop by
   letting a certificate commit to requiring a stapled response.  It saw
   little adoption: enabling it risks self-inflicted outages if the
   responder or the server's stapling path fails, and the ecosystem
   never reached the coverage that would let relying parties depend on
   it.  The stapled response remains a separate TLS signal with its own
   failure modes, layered on a CA-operated responder that must sign
   every response.

D.5.2.  Why This Mechanism Is Enforceable

   The hash chain tick is not a separate, optional signal: it is carried
   inside the MTCProof, which is part of the certificate presentation
   itself (Section 5).  A relying party that parses the certificate
   necessarily encounters the tick; there is no request step to omit,
   and nothing a middlebox or misconfigured server can strip while
   leaving a valid certificate.  A relying party can therefore hard-fail
   on a missing or invalid tick from the outset -- precisely what
   stapling could never achieve.  In effect this mechanism provides the
   property Must-Staple aimed at, a certificate that cannot be presented
   without current status, but makes it un-strippable by construction
   rather than by a policy flag, and does so with no per-response CA
   signature.

D.5.3.  Why It Is More Readily Deployable

   Several differences lower the deployment barrier relative to
   stapling:

   *  *No responder infrastructure and no per-response signatures.* The
      CA reveals a precomputed hash value per period; there is no OCSP
      responder fleet, responder certificate, or per-check signing
      operation.  Ticks are static within a period, self-authenticating,
      and cacheable by any HTTP intermediary, so distribution is far
      more robust than a signing responder -- the very fragility that
      made Must-Staple risky to enable.

   *  *No TLS-stack changes.* The tick travels inside the existing
      certificate structure, so no status_request negotiation or
      CertificateStatus handling is required in TLS implementations
      beyond MTC support itself.  Stapling requires status_request
      support on both ends.

   *  *A small, cacheable refresh instead of stapling machinery.* A
      server refreshes a 36-byte value once per period (Section 7), with
      no cryptographic operations, rather than fetching, validating, and
      stapling CA-signed OCSP responses with their own validity windows.

   *  *Greenfield enforcement.* MTC is new, so there is no legacy soft-
      fail install base to accommodate.  Within an MTC ecosystem,
      enforcement can be mandatory from day one (or made so by marking
      the anchor extension critical; see Appendix F), avoiding the
      transition that stapling never completed.

   The counterweight is that a tick, unlike a soft-failed OCSP response,
   is a hard dependency: a server that cannot refresh its tick within a
   period becomes unusable until it does.  Appendix F discusses this
   availability dependency and its mitigations.

Appendix E.  Alternatives Considered

E.1.  DNS-Based Tick Distribution

   An alternative to the HTTP-based tick distribution described in
   Section 7 is for the CA to publish current ticks via DNS records,
   which the authenticating party fetches and embeds in the MTCProof.
   For example, a TXT or other record type at a well-known name derived
   from the CA, log number, and entry index.

   Since the tick is embedded in the MTCProof regardless of how it was
   obtained, the relying party's verification procedure is unchanged.
   The choice of distribution channel is purely between the CA and the
   authenticating party.

   DNS-based distribution has some advantages over HTTP:

   *  *Caching infrastructure:* DNS's hierarchical caching architecture
      is well-suited to distributing small, frequently updated values.
      Recursive resolvers naturally cache and serve ticks without
      requiring the CA to operate CDN infrastructure.

   However, DNS-based distribution also has limitations:

   *  *Record size constraints:* While a single tick (36 bytes) fits
      easily in a DNS record, scaling to millions of entries may require
      careful zone design.  The CA would need one record per active
      certificate, which could result in very large zones.

   *  *Update propagation delay:* DNS TTLs and caching may delay
      propagation of new ticks.  The CA SHOULD set TTLs no longer than
      revocation_period seconds, but cached stale records could cause
      authenticating parties to serve expired ticks briefly.

   *  *Operational complexity for the CA:* The CA must update DNS
      records for every non-revoked certificate each period.  Depending
      on the DNS infrastructure, this may be more complex than serving
      an HTTP endpoint.

   Deployments MAY use DNS-based distribution as an alternative or
   complement to HTTP-based distribution.  The choice does not affect
   interoperability, since the relying party only sees the tick in the
   MTCProof.

   DNSSEC is not required for DNS-based tick distribution and SHOULD NOT
   be used.  Each tick is self-authenticating: the relying party
   verifies it by hashing it forward to the anchor already committed in
   the Merkle Tree.  An attacker who modifies a tick in transit cannot
   produce a value that passes this verification without inverting the
   hash function.  An attacker who suppresses a tick only prevents the
   authenticating party from obtaining a fresh tick, which is equivalent
   to a network-level denial of service against any distribution
   channel.  Adding DNSSEC would introduce unnecessary operational
   complexity (key management, signature generation for frequently
   changing records) and increase DNS response sizes, without improving
   the security of the revocation mechanism.

E.2.  AIA-Based Tick URL Discovery

   Another alternative is to convey the tick distribution URL via a new
   Authority Information Access (AIA) access method in the certificate,
   following the established pattern used for OCSP responder URLs in
   [RFC5280].

   This approach was rejected because:

   *  *Inflates log entries:* AIA is part of the TBSCertificate, which
      is committed to the Merkle Tree.  A ~50-80 byte URL in every log
      entry increases tree size and inclusion proof transmission costs,
      conflicting with MTC's goal of compactness.

   *  *Immutable once issued:* If the CA migrates its tick distribution
      infrastructure, all existing certificates still contain the old
      URL.  Delivering the URL out of band (Section 7.2) lets the CA
      migrate its tick infrastructure without certificate reissuance.

   *  *Only the authenticating party needs it, and only it should
      fetch:* Relying parties verify the embedded tick offline against
      the committed anchor and MUST NOT fetch ticks (Section 9.4).
      Putting a per-certificate URL in the certificate would not make
      fetching infeasible -- the URL is derivable regardless
      (Section 9.4) -- but placing it in a field relying parties
      routinely parse would standardize and encourage client-side tick
      fetching, reintroducing the OCSP-style privacy leak, latency, and
      soft-fail problems this mechanism avoids.

   *  *Redundant given existing CA relationship:* The authenticating
      party obtained the certificate from the CA (e.g., via ACME) and
      can receive the tick base URL through that same channel at zero
      per-certificate cost (Section 7.2).

   Out-of-band delivery of the base URL at provisioning (Section 7.2)
   conveys it at zero per-certificate cost.  CAs MAY additionally
   publish the base URL in the CA certificate SIA (Section 7.2) for a
   protocol-independent record.

E.3.  TLS Extension (Separate from Certificate)

   Another alternative was carrying the hash chain tick in a TLS
   CertificateEntry extension or a separate TLS extension, rather than
   embedding it in the MTCProof.

   This approach was rejected because:

   *  *Strippable:* A TLS extension can potentially be omitted by
      middleboxes or misconfigured servers.  Embedding the tick in the
      MTCProof makes it structurally inseparable from the certificate.

   *  *The OCSP stapling lesson:* OCSP stapling was defined as optional,
      requiring servers to opt in.  After more than a decade, stapling
      adoption remains incomplete, and browsers have been unable to
      enforce hard-fail policies.  Any mechanism that relies on a
      separate signaling channel risks the same outcome.

   *  *Unnecessary complexity:* Defining a new TLS extension type
      requires IANA registration and implementation changes in TLS
      stacks.  Embedding in the MTCProof requires no TLS-layer changes
      beyond MTC support itself.

E.4.  TLS status_request Extension

   The TLS status_request extension (defined for OCSP stapling) uses a
   CertificateStatusType enum that is designed to be extensible beyond
   OCSP.  In TLS 1.2, a new status type could deliver the tick in a
   CertificateStatus message; in TLS 1.3, it could be carried per-
   certificate in the CertificateEntry extensions.

   This approach was rejected for the same fundamental reason as a
   generic TLS extension: it makes the tick delivery optional and
   strippable.  The status_request mechanism is inherently opt-in — the
   client must request it, and the server can omit it without causing a
   hard failure.  Reusing an optional delivery channel for a mandatory
   validity condition is semantically contradictory and reintroduces the
   soft-fail problem that this mechanism is designed to eliminate.

   Additionally, status_request carries OCSPResponse semantics (a signed
   assertion from a responder); repurposing it for a bare hash value
   that is self-authenticating against the certificate would be a poor
   semantic fit.

E.5.  Shorter Certificate Lifetimes

   The simplest revocation strategy is to make certificates short-lived
   enough that revocation is unnecessary.  For example, 1-day
   certificates have at most 24-hour exposure after compromise.

   This approach has trade-offs that motivate longer lifetimes:

   *  *Issuance infrastructure load:* Shorter lifetimes require more
      frequent issuance.  With millions of subscribers, daily
      certificate issuance produces proportionally larger logs and more
      frequent Merkle Tree constructions.

   *  *Availability risk:* An authenticating party that cannot reach the
      CA for one day loses its certificate entirely.  Longer lifetimes
      provide more buffer against CA outages.

   *  *Trusted subtree state:* The number of landmark subtrees relying
      parties must maintain grows with shorter lifetimes and more
      frequent landmark allocation, at the cost of increased CA
      operational complexity.

   *  *Deployment constraints:* Root program policies such as
      [CHROME-MTC] have set maximum lifetimes (e.g., 47 days) based on
      ecosystem-wide operational feasibility assessments.  Not all
      deployments can support arbitrarily short lifetimes.

   Hash chain revocation provides the revocation latency benefits of
   short-lived certificates while retaining the operational advantages
   of longer lifetimes.

E.6.  CRLite / CRLSets / External Revocation

   External revocation systems like [CRLite] and [CRLSets] compress
   revocation information into compact data structures pushed to relying
   parties.  The base MTC specification suggests using these as a
   complement.

   This approach has limitations when used as the sole revocation
   mechanism for MTC:

   *  *Push latency:* These systems are updated on the order of hours to
      days, depending on the deployment.  They do not provide a
      guaranteed upper bound on revocation latency.

   *  *Relying party coverage:* Not all relying parties subscribe to
      external revocation feeds.  A mechanism that depends on the
      relying party having an up-to-date feed cannot provide universal
      revocation enforcement.

   *  *Separate trust path:* External revocation requires the relying
      party to trust the feed provider (e.g., the browser vendor) in
      addition to the CA.  Hash chain revocation uses only the existing
      CA trust relationship.

   These mechanisms remain valuable as defense-in-depth and as a
   fallback for the hash chain mechanism, as discussed in Section 9.

E.7.  Per-Certificate Signatures (OCSP-like)

   A CA could sign per-certificate non-revocation statements each
   period, analogous to OCSP responses.

   This approach was rejected because:

   *  *Signing load:* A CA with a billion active certificates would need
      to produce a billion signatures per period.  With post-quantum
      signature algorithms, this is computationally expensive.

   *  *Response size:* OCSP responses include a full signature (e.g.,
      3,309 bytes for ML-DSA-65).  Hash chain ticks are 36 bytes.

   *  *Complexity:* OCSP requires its own responder infrastructure,
      certificate chain, and protocol.  Hash chains require only a hash
      function.

Appendix F.  Anticipated Objections

   This section addresses some potential objections that may arise from
   the PLANTS community regarding this proposal.

F.1.  "MTC Was Designed to Avoid Revocation Complexity"

   The base MTC specification deliberately uses short-lived certificates
   to sidestep the complexity of traditional revocation mechanisms
   (CRLs, OCSP).  Adding a revocation layer may appear to reintroduce
   the very complexity MTC was designed to eliminate.

   However, this mechanism is fundamentally simpler than traditional
   revocation.  It requires no new PKI infrastructure (no responder
   certificates, no separate signing keys), no new protocols (no OCSP
   request/response), and no per-check signatures.  The entire mechanism
   is a single hash function applied iteratively.  The complexity budget
   is closer to "one additional hash computation per handshake" than to
   "deploy and operate an OCSP responder fleet."  The alternative —
   living with up to 47-day exposure windows after key compromise — is a
   concrete security cost, not a simplification.

F.2.  "This Creates a New Availability Dependency"

   Authenticating parties must fetch a fresh tick at least once per
   revocation_period.  If the CA's tick distribution infrastructure is
   unavailable for longer than one period, the certificate becomes
   unusable.  This may be seen as undermining MTC's advantage of
   decoupling certificate validity from real-time CA availability.

   The revocation period is effectively the outage tolerance budget: a
   one-hour period means the authenticating party can tolerate at most
   one hour of tick distribution unavailability before its certificate
   becomes unusable.  Shorter revocation periods provide faster
   revocation enforcement but leave less margin for infrastructure
   failures.  Conversely, a one-day period provides 24 hours of buffer
   but delays revocation enforcement proportionally.  Deployments must
   choose a revocation period that balances their revocation latency
   requirements against their realistic availability expectations for
   tick distribution infrastructure.

   This concern is real but bounded.  First, the dependency is on a
   trivial HTTP GET returning 36 bytes — far less fragile than ACME
   issuance or OCSP responder availability.  Second, the authenticating
   party has a full period (e.g., one hour) of buffer; brief outages are
   invisible to relying parties.  Third, CAs already operate high-
   availability infrastructure for issuance; tick distribution is a
   strictly simpler service (static content, cacheable, CDN-friendly).
   Additionally, relying parties can choose to accept ticks that are
   slightly stale (e.g., two or three periods old rather than only the
   current or immediately preceding period), according to local policy.
   This trades revocation latency for resilience: if a CA outage
   prevents the authenticating party from obtaining a fresh tick,
   relying parties with a more permissive staleness policy will continue
   to accept the certificate while the outage is resolved.  The base
   verification procedure (Section 6, step 4) already allows the
   immediately preceding period; deployments with known availability
   concerns MAY extend this window further.

   As a further mitigation, authenticating parties SHOULD obtain Merkle
   Tree Certificates from multiple independent CAs.  If one CA's tick
   distribution infrastructure becomes unavailable, the authenticating
   party can immediately switch to presenting a certificate from a
   different CA whose ticks remain current.  This multi-CA strategy
   eliminates the single point of failure: a tick distribution outage at
   one CA causes no service disruption as long as at least one other
   CA's infrastructure remains operational.  Since MTC certificates are
   lightweight to obtain and maintain, the incremental cost of holding
   certificates from two or three CAs is modest compared to the
   resilience benefit.

   Finally, the alternative (no in-band revocation) means the ecosystem
   depends entirely on external revocation systems whose availability
   the CA does not control.

F.3.  "Just Use Shorter Certificate Lifetimes"

   If revocation latency is the concern, reducing certificate lifetimes
   (e.g., to one day) achieves similar bounds without new mechanism
   complexity.  The PLANTS community may prefer this simpler approach.

   Shorter lifetimes and hash chain revocation are not mutually
   exclusive, but shorter lifetimes alone impose costs that hash chains
   avoid.  Daily issuance for millions of subscribers produces
   proportionally larger Merkle Trees, more frequent log publications,
   and tighter availability requirements on issuance infrastructure.  A
   one-day certificate that cannot be renewed due to a 2-hour CA outage
   causes immediate service disruption; a 47-day certificate with hash
   chain revocation survives the same outage with no impact (the tick
   was already fetched).  Hash chains provide short revocation latency
   while preserving the operational headroom that longer lifetimes
   afford.

F.4.  "CRLite/CRLSets Already Solve This Problem"

   Browser vendors already push compressed revocation data to relying
   parties.  Adding an in-band mechanism may appear redundant.

   External revocation systems and hash chain revocation serve different
   roles.  CRLite and CRLSets are controlled by the browser vendor, not
   the CA; they operate on the vendor's update schedule; and they
   provide coverage only to relying parties that subscribe to the feed.
   Hash chain revocation is CA-operated, has a deterministic latency
   bound (one period), and is enforced by every relying party that
   validates the certificate — including non-browser TLS clients, IoT
   devices, and any implementation that supports MTC but has no external
   revocation feed.  The two mechanisms are complementary: external
   revocation is defense-in-depth, while hash chains provide a universal
   baseline.

F.5.  "The Non-Critical Extension Means Split Enforcement"

   Since id-pe-hashChainAnchor is marked non-critical, relying parties
   that have not implemented this mechanism will ignore it.  This
   creates a transition period where revocation via hash chains is
   enforced by some relying parties but not others.

   This is an intentional deployment strategy, not a design flaw.
   Marking the extension non-critical enables incremental deployment:
   CAs can begin issuing certificates with hash chain anchors today, and
   relying parties can adopt enforcement as implementations mature.
   During the transition, the base MTC revoked-ranges mechanism and
   external revocation systems continue to provide coverage.  This is
   consistent with how many X.509 extensions are specified as non-
   critical (e.g., Authority Information Access, Authority Key
   Identifier, CRL Distribution Points per [RFC5280]): the extension
   carries useful information that aware implementations act on, while
   unaware implementations can safely proceed without it.

   Furthermore, this document specifies SHOULD rather than MUST for the
   non-critical marking.  An MTC ecosystem in which all relying parties
   are known to support hash chain revocation MAY mark the extension
   critical, providing hard enforcement from day one within that
   ecosystem.  A root program policy could similarly mandate critical
   marking once adoption is deemed sufficient.

F.6.  "CA Seed Compromise Is Catastrophic"

   If an attacker compromises the CA's stored hash chain seeds, they can
   compute valid ticks for revoked certificates, completely defeating
   the mechanism.

   This is true, and is acknowledged in Section 9.  However, the threat
   model is no worse than the status quo: a CA whose signing key is
   compromised can issue arbitrary certificates.  Seeds require
   confidentiality and integrity protection — for example, encrypted-at-
   rest storage with strong access controls and monitoring — but their
   operational profile differs from signing keys: a CA with millions of
   active certificates must store and retrieve seeds in bulk, which is
   better suited to encrypted database storage than to HSMs designed for
   a small number of high-value keys.  Additionally, the fallback to
   revoked ranges provides a recovery path: if seed compromise is
   detected, the CA revokes affected certificates via ranges, which
   relying parties enforce regardless of hash chain state.

F.7.  "Modifying MTCProof Breaks Existing Implementations"

   Adding a status_tick field to MTCProof requires changes to every MTC
   implementation.  The base MTC specification may not have anticipated
   this kind of extension.

   This objection is well-founded.  Section 7.2 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] explicitly requires relying
   parties to reject an MTCProof if the signatureValue contains "extra
   data after the MTCProof."  The current MTCProof structure has no
   extensibility mechanism: it is a fixed sequence of fields with no
   trailing extensions block or version indicator.

   Consequently, appending a status_tick to the MTCProof will cause any
   existing MTC implementation to reject the certificate — regardless of
   whether the X.509 extension is marked critical or non-critical.  An
   unaware relying party will ignore the non-critical id-pe-
   hashChainAnchor extension, proceed to parse the MTCProof, find 36
   unexpected trailing bytes, and fail verification.

   This means that, in practice, deploying this mechanism requires one
   of the following:

   1.  *Amendment to the base MTC specification:* The MTCProof structure
       is amended so that conforming parsers accept the tick -- either
       by appending the fixed status_tick field (Section 5.1.1) or by
       adding the general proof_extensions field (see Appendix G).  This
       is the preferred approach and is proposed by this document.

   2.  *Critical extension only:* The id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension is
       marked critical, so unaware implementations reject at the X.509
       extension stage (before reaching MTCProof parsing).  This
       sacrifices incremental deployment.

   3.  *Concurrent deployment:* Since MTC is not yet deployed at scale,
       both the base spec and this extension can be implemented together
       before the ecosystem ossifies.  Early implementations can adopt
       the extended MTCProof structure from the start.

   Both encodings this document describes (Section 5) take option 1:
   each amends the base MTC specification so that conforming parsers
   accept the tick.  The RECOMMENDED trailing status_tick encoding
   (Section 5.1.1) is the minimal such amendment; the proof-extension
   encoding (Section 5.1.2) is the alternative for a base specification
   that also wants a general, reusable extensibility point, at the cost
   of the abuse surface in Appendix G.5.  Options 2 and 3 remain
   available as transition strategies for an ecosystem that deploys
   before the chosen amendment is widely implemented.  See Appendix G
   for the proof_extensions amendment.

F.8.  "Hourly Tick Refresh Adds Operational Burden to Servers"

   Authenticating parties already perform periodic certificate
   management: renewing certificates before expiry (recommended at 75%
   of lifetime, per Section 10.4 of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs])
   and optionally fetching landmark-relative certificates as new
   landmarks are allocated.  Adding an hourly tick refresh introduces a
   new operational loop with a tighter cadence than certificate renewal
   and — unlike the landmark-relative fetch, which is optional and best-
   effort — a hard deadline: if the tick is not refreshed in a timely
   manner, the certificate becomes unusable.

   The refresh is a single HTTP GET returning 36 bytes, with no
   cryptographic operations required on the authenticating party's side.
   This is orders of magnitude simpler than ACME certificate renewal
   (which involves key generation, CSR construction, challenge
   completion, and certificate installation).  The authenticating party
   can implement tick refresh as a lightweight background process with
   retry logic and local caching.  If the period is set to one day
   instead of one hour, the operational cadence matches what servers
   already do for DNS record TTL refreshes.

F.9.  "This Introduces a Covert Denial-of-Service Vector"

   A CA can selectively withhold ticks from a specific subscriber,
   effectively revoking their certificate without any auditable signal.
   This weaponizes the revocation mechanism as a censorship tool.

   This concern applies equally to any CA-mediated revocation system and
   is inherent in the CA trust model.  A CA can already refuse to issue
   or renew certificates for any subscriber.  Tick withholding is
   detectable: the authenticating party knows it did not receive a tick
   and can raise an alarm, switch CAs, or fall back to a traditionally-
   signed certificate.  Furthermore, the tick distribution endpoint can
   be monitored by third parties (CT-style auditing), making selective
   withholding observable.  The threat is real but not novel, and the
   mitigations (market pressure, monitoring, CA switching) are the same
   ones that discipline CA behavior today.

F.10.  "Verification Cost Grows Linearly with Certificate Age"

   A relying party verifying a tick near the end of a 47-day
   certificate's lifetime must compute up to 1,127 hashes.  This linear
   cost may be unacceptable for constrained devices.

   On modern hardware, 1,127 SHA-256 operations take approximately 10-20
   microseconds — negligible compared to the TLS handshake's asymmetric
   cryptography (ECDHE key exchange, signature verification).  Even on
   constrained IoT devices, SHA-256 is typically hardware-accelerated
   and the computation completes in under a millisecond.  For
   comparison, verifying a single Ed25519 signature costs roughly the
   same as hundreds of SHA-256 operations.  If the linear cost is
   nonetheless a concern for a specific deployment, choosing a shorter
   certificate lifetime (reducing chain_length) or a longer
   revocation_period (also reducing chain_length) provides a direct
   mitigation.

Appendix G.  Proposed MTCProof Extensibility

   The RECOMMENDED way to carry the tick is the fixed trailing
   status_tick field (Section 5.1.1), which needs no general
   extensibility mechanism.  This section describes an alternative: a
   general, reusable proof-level extensions field that the base MTC
   specification [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] MAY adopt if it
   wants future mechanisms (beyond hash chain revocation) to attach data
   to the certificate presentation without a further structural change
   each time.  It is not required for hash chain revocation alone, and
   it carries the abuse surface discussed in Appendix G.5.

G.1.  Motivation

   The current MTCProof structure is a fixed sequence of fields with no
   extensibility point:

   struct {
       MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension extensions<0..2^16-1>;
       uint48 start;
       uint48 end;
       HashValue inclusion_proof<0..2^16-1>;
       MTCSignature signatures<0..2^16-1>;
   } MTCProof;

   Section 7.2 of [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] requires
   implementations to reject certificates where the signatureValue
   contains extra data after the MTCProof.  This means no trailing data
   can be added without breaking all existing parsers.

   The existing extensions field in MTCProof carries the log entry's
   MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension values, which are committed to the
   Merkle Tree.  These cannot carry dynamic, per-period data like hash
   chain ticks because the Merkle Tree inclusion proof would fail.

   A proof-level extensions field — not committed to the tree and freely
   updatable by the authenticating party — would allow the MTCProof to
   carry revocation ticks and potentially other future self-
   authenticating proof-level values without requiring a new version of
   the base specification for each.

G.2.  Proposed Amendment

   This document proposes updating [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]
   with the following extended MTCProof structure:

   enum { hash_chain_tick(0), (2^16-1) } MTCProofExtensionType;

   struct {
       MTCProofExtensionType extension_type;
       opaque extension_data<0..2^16-1>;
   } MTCProofExtension;

   struct {
       MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension entry_extensions<0..2^16-1>;
       uint48 start;
       uint48 end;
       HashValue inclusion_proof<0..2^16-1>;
       MTCSignature signatures<0..2^16-1>;
       MTCProofExtension proof_extensions<0..2^16-1>;
   } MTCProof;

   The proof_extensions field is a variable-length list with a 2-byte
   length prefix.  When empty, it encodes as two zero bytes (0x0000),
   adding minimal overhead to certificates that do not use any proof
   extensions.

   The existing extensions field is renamed to entry_extensions to
   distinguish it from the new proof_extensions field.  Both are
   variable-length lists of tag-length-value structures, but they serve
   different roles: entry_extensions carries the log entry's
   MerkleTreeCertEntryExtension values (committed to the Merkle Tree),
   while proof_extensions carries proof-level data that can be freely
   updated without affecting the inclusion proof.

   Relying parties MUST ignore unrecognized proof extension types.

   The "extra data" check in Section 7.2 of
   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs] would be amended to account for
   the trailing proof_extensions field.

G.3.  Hash Chain Tick as a Proof Extension

   With this extensibility mechanism, the hash chain tick is carried as
   a proof extension rather than a bare trailing field:

   struct {
       uint32 period;
       HashValue value;
   } HashChainTick;

   The HashChainTick is encoded as an MTCProofExtension with
   extension_type set to hash_chain_tick(0) and extension_data
   containing the serialized HashChainTick (4 + HASH_SIZE bytes).

G.4.  Backward Compatibility

   Because the proof_extensions field uses a length-prefixed encoding,
   an implementation that supports the extended structure but does not
   recognize a particular extension type can skip over it by consuming
   the declared length.  Implementations that predate the amendment will
   reject the certificate at the MTCProof parsing stage (due to trailing
   bytes), which is acceptable: such implementations would also not
   recognize the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension's semantics, so they
   cannot verify hash chain revocation regardless.

   For the transition period, ecosystems have two options:

   *  *Mark the extension critical:* Unaware implementations reject at
      the X.509 extension stage, producing a clear error rather than an
      opaque parse failure.

   *  *Deploy the base spec amendment first:* Once the proof_extensions
      field is adopted into the base MTC specification, all conforming
      implementations will parse it (ignoring unknown types), enabling
      incremental deployment of hash chain revocation with a non-
      critical X.509 extension.

G.5.  Considerations for the proof_extensions Field

   The proof_extensions field is, by design, an unauthenticated and
   freely mutable region: it is not committed to the Merkle Tree, no
   cosignature covers the MTCProof, and relying parties ignore
   unrecognized types.  These properties are what let the hash chain
   tick be updated each period, but as a general-purpose extension point
   they also let an authenticating party, or any intermediary that
   relays the certificate, add, alter, or strip proof extensions
   undetectably, and insert arbitrary data that relying parties silently
   ignore ("stuffing").  This does not affect hash chain revocation
   itself -- the tick is self-authenticating and its presence is
   mandated by the id-pe-hashChainAnchor extension, which is committed
   to the tree, so stuffed or stripped data can neither forge nor
   suppress a tick.  But if the base MTC specification adopts
   proof_extensions as a general mechanism, the following constraints
   SHOULD apply so that the field is not abused or misused:

   Bounded size and count:  proof_extensions is transmitted in every
      handshake, so an unbounded ignored field undercuts the compactness
      that motivates MTC and creates a bloat and denial-of-service
      surface.  The base specification SHOULD set a small maximum total
      size and extension count, well below the 2^16-1 the length prefix
      permits, and relying parties MAY reject certificates that exceed
      it.

   Strict, canonical encoding:  Proof extensions SHOULD appear in
      ascending order by extension_type with no duplicate types, and
      parsers SHOULD require the declared lengths to consume the field
      exactly, with no trailing bytes.  This mirrors the ordering
      discipline the base specification already applies to cosignatures
      and limits ambiguity and abuse through many or malformed
      extensions.

   Registration:  MTCProofExtensionType values SHOULD be administered by
      an IANA registry with a defined allocation policy and a delimited
      private-use range, rather than left as an open channel.

   Security-relevant extensions must be anchored:  Because unrecognized
      or absent proof extensions are ignored, any future proof extension
      carrying security-relevant data MUST make its presence mandatory
      and self-authenticating through an element committed to the Merkle
      Tree, as hash chain revocation does with the id-pe-hashChainAnchor
      extension (Section 4).  Otherwise "ignore if unknown" becomes a
      strippable soft-fail -- exactly the failure mode described in
      Appendix D.5.

   No transparency:  Unlike entry_extensions, proof_extensions are
      neither logged nor committed to the tree, so monitors never
      observe them.  Mechanisms that require transparency MUST use
      entry_extensions instead; proof_extensions MUST NOT be treated as
      a transparent or auditable channel.

   Identity:  proof_extensions widen the malleability of the
      signatureValue already noted in Section 12.6 of
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs].  Applications that derive a
      unique identifier from a certificate MUST derive it from the
      TBSCertificate, never from the MTCProof.

Acknowledgments

   The hash chain revocation concept is based on Silvio Micali's
   foundational work on efficient certificate revocation [MICALI].  The
   name "MTCRS" is a nod to Micali's Certificate Revocation System
   (CRS); and coincidentally, "RS" also happens to be the initials of
   the author of this document.

Author's Address

   Rob Stradling
   Sectigo
   Email: rob@sectigo.com
